H neyc mb
TEXTBOOK IN ENGLISH
FOR CLASS VII

ISBN 81-7450-676-4
First Edition
February 2007 Phalguna 1928
Reprinted
October 2007 Kartika 1929
March 2009 Phalguna 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
November 2010 Kartika 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
October 2013 Asvina 1935
PD 350T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker
or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085

` 50.00

Phone : 011-26562708

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

Publication Team
Head, Publication
Division

: Ashok Srivastava

Chief Production
Officer

: Shiv Kumar

Chief Business
Manager

: Gautam Ganguly

Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCER T water mark

Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)

Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council
of Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at I.G. Printers Pvt. Ltd.,
104, DSIDC Complex, Okhla
Industrial Area, Phase-I, New Delhi
110 020

Production Officer

: Arun Chitkara

Cover and Layout
Arvinder Chawla
Illustrations
Bhushan Shaligram

Foreword
T H E National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005,
recommends that children’s life at school must be linked to
their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape
our system and causes a gap between the school, home and
community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis
of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance
of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the
direction of a child-centered system of education outlined in
the National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to
reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative
activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and
initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body
of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines
and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table
is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are
actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers

iv

have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages
with greater consideration for child psychology and the time
available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion
in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the
textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory committee
in languages, Professor Namwar Singh, and the Chief Advisor
for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli, for guiding the work
of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, materials and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of
the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry
of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship
of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande for
their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinements.

New Delhi
20 November 2006

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

Textbook Development
Committee
C HAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE

IN

LANGUAGES

Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi.

C HIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, English and Foreign Languages
University (EFLU), Hyderabad

C HIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former Professor and Head, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

MEMBERS
Beena Sugathan, PGT (English), Loreto Convent, Delhi Cantonment,
New Delhi
Geetali Dowarah, PGT (English), Mohandari Airforce School,
Dibrugarh, Assam
Rooma Palit, PGT (English), Delhi Public School, Nalconagar,
Angul, Orissa
Shalini Advani, formerly Principal, British School, New Delhi

MEMBE R –C OORDINATOR
Nasiruddin Khan, Former Reader in English, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

Acknowledgements
THE National Council of Educational Research and Training
is grateful to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the Central
Insitute of English and Foreign Languages. Hyderabad, and
the Regional Language Centre, Singapore, for going through
the manuscript and making valuable suggestions. Special
thanks are due to Professor R. Amritavalli for editing
the texts of two Units in the book and preparing their
accompanying exercises in addition to her overall monitoring
and assistance as Chief Adivsor.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this
book NCERT would like to thank the following: Rupa & Co.,
New Delhi for ‘A Gift of Chappals’ from Mridu in Madras—
Goruchaka Turns Up by Vasantha Surya; Penguin Books,
New Delhi for ‘Expert Detectives’ from The Broken Flute by
Sharada Dwivedi; Puffin Books for ‘The Invention of VitaWonk’ from Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator by Roald
Dahl; Longman Group, UK Limited, for ‘Gopal and the Hilsa
Fish’ from Longman English 1 by R.B.Heath; and
Ramachandra Guha for the ‘The Story of Cricket’ from A
Corner of a Foreign Field, Picador.
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders.
We apologise for some omissions, and will gratefully
acknowledge them as soon as they can be traced.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication
Department, NCER T, for their support. NCER T also
acknowledges the contributions made by Parash Ram
Kaushik, Incharge, Computer Station; Razi Ahmad and
Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; and Mathew John and
Shahzad Husain, Proof Readers.

Contents
Foreword ... iii

N OTES FOR

THE

TEACHER (UNITS 1– 3) ... 1

1. Three Questions ... 7
The Squirrel ... 17
2. A Gift of Chappals ... 18
The Rebel ... 33
3. Gopal and the Hilsa Fish ... 36
The Shed ... 48
N OTES FOR THE TEACHER (UNITS 4 –7) ... 50
4. The Ashes That Made Trees Bloom ... 55
Chivvy ... 69
5. Quality ... 71
Trees ... 83
6. Expert Detectives ... 85
Mystery of the Talking Fan ... 97
7. The Invention of Vita-Wonk ... 99
Dad and the Cat and the Tree ... 107
N OTES FOR THE TEACHER (UNITS 8–10) ... 111
8. Fire: Friend and Foe ... 114
Meadow Surprises ... 123
9. A Bicycle in Good Repair ... 126
Garden Snake ... 137
10. The Story of Cricket ... 139

viii

