Honeydew
Textbook in English for Class VIII

ISBN 978-81-7450-821-8
First Edition
February 2008 Phalguna 1929
Reprint Edition
January 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
October 2013 Asvina 1935
PD 350T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2008

` 50.00

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker
or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016

Phone : 011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

Publication Team
Head, Publication
Division

: Ashok Srivastava

Chief Production
Officer

: Shiv Kumar

Chief Business
Manager

: Gautam Ganguly

Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT water mark

Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)

Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
110016 and printed at Young Printing
Press, 2626, Gali No. 7, Bihari
Colony, Shahdra, Delhi 110 092

Production Assistant : Sunil Kumar
Cover, Layout and Illustratiosns
Blue Fish
Photographs
Nimisha Kapoor

Foreword
T HE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005,
recommends that children’s life at school must be linked
to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an
attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the
direction of a child-centered system of education outlined
in the National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that
school principals and teachers will take to encourage
children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate
new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons
why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning,
not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school
routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily
time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing
the annual calendar so that the required number of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The
methods used for teaching and evaluation will also
determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than

a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology
and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher
priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities
requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and
Training (NCER T) appreciates the hard work done by
the textbook development committee responsible for this
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
committee in languages, Professor Namwar Singh, and
the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli,
for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are
grateful to their principals for making this possible. We
are indebted to the institutions and organisations which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, materials and personnel. We are especially
grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor
Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable
us to undertake further revision and refinements.
New Delhi
30 November 2007

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

iv

Textbook Development Committee
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY COMMITTEE IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of
Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, English and Foreign
Languages University, Hyderabad

CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former Professor and Head,
Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

MEMBERS
Beena Sugathan, PGT (English), Loreto Convent, Delhi
Cantonment, New Delhi
Madhavi Gayathri Raman, Lecturer, English and
Foreign Languages University, Hyderabad
Rooma Palit, PGT (English), Delhi Public School,
Nalcognar Angul, Orissa
Shyamala Kumaradas, (formerly of CIEFL), Hyderabad,
3C Sheetal Haven, Peringavu, Trichur

M EMBER–COORDINATOR
Nasiruddin Khan, Former Reader in English,
Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and
Training is grateful to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of
the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages,
Hyderabad, and the Regional Language Centre,
Singapore, for going through the manuscript and making
valuable suggestions. Special thanks are due to Professor
R. Amritavalli for specific suggestions in addition to
overall monitoring and assistance as Chief Advisor.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in
this book, NCERT would like to thank the following:
Michael Morpurgo for ‘The Best Christmas Present in
the World’ from The Gaurdian, UK; Publications Division
Government of India, New Delhi for ‘Glimpses of the
Past’ from Our Freedom Movement by S.D. Sawant; Katha,
New Delhi for ‘Bepin Choudhury’s Lapse of Memory’ from
The Nose Doctor; Firdaus Kanga for ‘A visit to Cambridge
from Heaven on Wheels, Bloomsbury; and to Ruskin Bond
for ‘A Short Monsoon Diary’ from Ruskin Bond’s Book of
Nature, Penguin Books, New Delhi.
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright
holders. We apologise for some omissions, and will
gratefully acknowledge them as soon as they can be traced.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication
Department, NCERT, for their support. NCERT also
acknowledges the contributions made by Parash Ram
Kaushik, Incharge, Computer Station; Mohmad Harun
and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Neena Chandra,
Copy Editor and Mathew John, Proof Reader.

Contents
Foreword...iii
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER (UNITS 1-3)

1-8

1. The Best Christmas Present
in the World
The Ant and the Cricket

21

2. The Tsunami
Geography Lesson

24
34

3. Glimpses of the Past
Macavity : The Mystery Cat

36
50

NOTES FOR THE TEACHER (U NITS 4-7)

9

53-59

4. Bepin Choudhury’s Lapse of Memory
The Last Bargain

60
74

5. The Summit Within
The School Boy

76
84

6. This is Jody’s Fawn
The Duck and the Kangaroo

87
97

7. A Visit to Cambridge
When I set out for Lyonnesse
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER (U NITS 8-10)

100
109
111-112

8. A Short Monsoon Diary
On the Grasshopper and Cricket

113
122

9. The Great Stone Face–I

124

10. The Great Stone Face–II

132

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.

