It so happened...
Supplementary Reader in English
for Class VIII

ISBN 81-7450-835-5
First Edition
April 2008 Vaisakha 1930
Reprinted
January 2009 Magha 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
October 2013 Asvina 1935
PD 350T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2008

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker
or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085

` ??.00

Phone : 011-26562708

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

Publication Team

Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT water mark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at ....?

Head, Publication
Division

: Ashok Srivastava

Chief Production
Officer

: Shiv Kumar

Chief Business
Manager

: Gautam Ganguly

Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Production Assistant : Sunil Kumar
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Blue Fish

THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends
that children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside
the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of
bookish learning which continues to shape our system and
causes a gap between the school, home and community. The
syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an
attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a
child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy
of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect
on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of
the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are
ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines
and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is
as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar
so that the required number of teaching days are actually
devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this supplementary
reader proves for making children’s life at school a happy
experience rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the
time available for teaching. The book attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities

J
J

for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups,
and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook
development committee responsible for this book. We wish to
thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in languages,
Professor Namwar Singh, and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this book;
we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We
are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, materials
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the
National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor
Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable
time and contribution. As an organisation committed
to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, NCER T welcomes comments and
suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinements.

J

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

New Delhi
30 November 2007

iv

J
J

J

J

T HE main objective of this supplementary reader is to promote
among learners the habit of reading independently with interest,
understanding and enjoyment. It seeks to enable them to read
independently in the sense that they would not expect the book
to be taken up page by page in the classroom. They would
rather read it on their own and later share and confirm
their responses and appreciation with the teacher and the peer
group through discussions, questions and, wherever possible,
even role-play.
The book contains ten pieces. Each piece has been divided into
two or three manageable sections, each section briefly summarised
in point form without revealing crucial turns and twists of the
storyline, thus sustaining readers’ curiosity and interest. Whilereading ‘Comprehension Check,’ given at the end of sections, is a
recall of what has been read and understood so far.
This format is being tried to make comprehension easier
and concentration keener. Each piece is also followed by a set
of questions as aids to understanding and, at many places,
topics for discussion in groups. Points under ‘Think it Over’
are largely such quotations as have a direct bearing on the
theme of the story. Some quotations may not be immediately
comprehensible to learners. Teachers may therefore want to play
a direct role in explaining, simplifying or paraphrasing lines/
topics and suggest appropriate sub-topics to facilitate a
focussed discussion in small groups. All questions should be
attempted orally before well-formulated answers are put down
on paper. Discussion on related topics should be encouraged
so that learners get an opportunity to go beyond the book and
feel inspired to reach hitherto undiscovered vistas of knowledge
and pleasure.
The stories, amply illustrated, deal with themes of
cooperation, compassion, respect and love for flora and fauna,
sound decision-making, science fiction, peace and harmony. It
is hoped that young readers will find the book enjoyable and
rewarding, and will feel motivated to read extensively on their
own to become proficient readers in the years to come.

J

J

J

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of
Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

CHIEF ADVISOR
R.Amritavalli, Professor, English and Foreign Languages
University, Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

MEMBERS
Beena Sugathan, PGT (English), Loreto Convent, Delhi
Cantonment, New Delhi
Madhavi Gayathri Raman, Lecturer, English and Foreign
Languages University, Hyderabad

Rooma Palit, PGT (English), Delhi Public School, Nalconagar,
Angul, Odisha
Shyamala Kumaradas (formerly of CIEFL, Hyderabad),
3C Sheetal Haven, Peringavu, Trichur
MEMBER–COORDINATOR
Nasiruddin Khan, Former Reader in English, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

J

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.

J

J

T HE National Council of Educational Research and Training is
grateful to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the Central Insitute
of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, and the
Regional Language Centre, Singapore for going through the
manuscript and making valuable suggestions. Special thanks
are due to Professor R. Amritavalli for her overall monitoring
and assistance as Chief Adivsor.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this book
NCERT would like to thank the following: Gita Wolf and
Anoushka Ravishankar for ‘Children at work’ from Trash—On
Ragpicker Children and Recycling, Tara Publishing & Books
for Change, Chennai, 1999; M.S. Bela Raja for ‘The treasure
within’ from Sparsh—A Newsletter from The Resource Centre,
The Valley School, Bangalore, Vol : 003, July 2001; Ruskin
Bond for ‘The fight’ from Time Stops at Shamli and Other
Stories, Penguin India, 1989; and Jayant Narlikar for ‘The
comet’ from Tales of the Future, Witness Books, Delhi, 2005.
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders.
We apologise for some omissions, and will gratefully
acknowledge them as soon as they can be traced.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication Department,
NCERT, for their support. NCERT also acknowledges the
contributions made by Parash Ram Kaushik, Incharge,
Computer Resource Centre; Razi Ahmad and Inder Kumar, DTP
Operators; and Mathew John, Proof Reader.

J

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)

guarantees these

Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.

J

Contents

Foreword

A Note for the Teacher

iii

v

1. How the Camel got his hump

1

2. Children at work

7

3. The Selfish Giant

17

4. The treasure within

25

5. Princess September

34

6. The fight

45

7. The open window

55

8. Jalebis

62

9. The comet — I

73

10. The comet — II

81

