3. The Little Girl
BEFORE YOU READ
•

Do you feel you know your parents better now, than when
you were much younger? Perhaps you now understand the
reasons for some of their actions that used to upset you earlier.

•

This story about a little girl whose feelings for her father
change from fear to understanding will probably find an echo
in every home.

1. TO the little girl he was a figure to be feared and a figure to be feared:

avoided. Every morning before going to work he came
into her room and gave her a casual kiss, to which
she responded with “Goodbye, Father”. And oh,
there was a glad sense of relief when she heard the
noise of the carriage growing fainter and fainter
down the long road!
In the evening when he came home she stood
near the staircase and heard his loud voice in the
hall. “Bring my tea into the drawing-room... Hasn’t
the paper come yet? Mother, go and see if my paper’s
out there — and bring me my slippers.”
2.
“Kezia,” Mother would call to her, “if you’re a
good girl you can come down and take off father’s
boots.” Slowly the girl would slip down the stairs,
more slowly still across the hall, and push open
the drawing-room door.
By that time he had his spectacles on and looked
at her over them in a way that was terrifying to
the little girl.
“Well, Kezia, hurry up and pull off these boots
and take them outside. Have you been a good
girl today?”
“I d-d-don’t know, Father.”

a person to be feared

slip down: come
down quietly and
unwillingly

“You d-d-don’t know? If you stutter like that
Mother will have to take you to the doctor.”
3.
She never stuttered with other people — had
quite given it up — but only with Father, because
then she was trying so hard to say the words
properly.
“What’s the matter? What are you looking so
wretched about? Mother, I wish you taught this child
not to appear on the brink of suicide... Here, Kezia,
carry my teacup back to the table carefully.”
He was so big — his hands and his neck,
especially his mouth when he yawned. Thinking
about him alone was like thinking about a giant.
4.
On Sunday afternoons Grandmother sent her
down to the drawing-room to have a “nice talk with
Father and Mother”. But the little girl always found
Mother reading and Father stretched out on the
sofa, his handkerchief on his face, his feet on one
of the best cushions, sleeping soundly and snoring.

given it up: stopped
doing it

wretched: unhappy
on the brink of
suicide: about to
commit suicide

The little girl always found Mother reading and
Father stretched out on the sofa.
The Little Girl / 33

She sat on a stool, gravely watched him until he
woke and stretched, and asked the time — then
looked at her.
“Don’t stare so, Kezia. You look like a little
brown owl.”
One day, when she was kept indoors with a cold,
her grandmother told her that father’s birthday was
next week, and suggested she should make him a
pin-cushion for a gift out of a beautiful piece of
yellow silk.
5.
Laboriously, with a double cotton, the little girl
stitched three sides. But what to fill it with? That
was the question. The grandmother was out in the
garden, and she wandered into Mother’s bedroom
to look for scraps. On the bed-table she discovered
a great many sheets of fine paper, gathered them
up, tore them into tiny pieces, and stuffed her case,
then sewed up the fourth side.
That night there was a hue and cry in the house.
Father’s great speech for the Port Authority had
been lost. Rooms were searched; servants
questioned. Finally Mother came into Kezia’s room.
“Kezia, I suppose you didn’t see some papers on
a table in our room?”
“Oh yes,” she said, “I tore them up for my
surprise.”
“What!” screamed Mother. “Come straight down
to the dining-room this instant.”
6.
And she was dragged down to where Father was
pacing to and fro, hands behind his back.
“Well?” he said sharply.
Mother explained.
He stopped and stared at the child.
“Did you do that?”
“N-n-no”, she whispered.
“Mother, go up to her room and fetch down the
damned thing — see that the child’s put to bed
this instant.”
34 / Beehive

laboriously: with a lot
of effort or difficulty
wandered into: went
into, by chance
scraps: small pieces
of cloth or paper,
etc. that are not
needed
hue and cry: angry
protest

Crying too much to explain, she lay in the
shadowed room watching the evening light make a
sad little pattern on the floor.
Then Father came into the room with a ruler in
his hands.
“I am going to beat you for this,” he said.
“Oh, no, no”, she screamed, hiding under the
bedclothes.
He pulled them aside.
“Sit up,” he ordered, “and hold out your hands.
You must be taught once and for all not to touch
what does not belong to you.”
“But it was for your b-b-birthday.”
Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms.
8.
Hours later, when Grandmother had wrapped
her in a shawl and rocked her in the rocking-chair,
the child clung to her soft body.
“What did God make fathers for?” she sobbed.
“Here’s a clean hanky, darling. Blow your nose.
Go to sleep, pet; you’ll forget all about it in the
morning. I tried to explain to Father but he was too
upset to listen tonight.”
But the child never forgot. Next time she saw
him she quickly put both hands behind her back
and a red colour flew into her cheeks.
9.
The Macdonalds lived next door. They had five
children. Looking through a gap in the fence the
little girl saw them playing ‘tag’ in the evening.
The father with the baby, Mao, on his shoulders,
two little girls hanging on to his coat pockets
ran round and round the flower-beds, shaking
with laughter. Once she saw the boys turn the
hose on him—and he tried to catch them laughing
all the time.
Then it was she decided there were different
sorts of fathers.
Suddenly, one day, Mother became ill, and she
and Grandmother went to hospital.
The little girl was left alone in the house with
Alice, the cook. That was all right in the daytime,
7.

tag: a children’s
game of catching one
another

The Little Girl / 35

The little girl saw through a gap the Macdonalds
playing ‘tag’ in the evening.

but while Alice was putting her to bed she grew
suddenly afraid.
10.
“What’ll I do if I have a nightmare?” she asked.
“I often have nightmares and then Grannie takes
me into her bed—I can’t stay in the dark—it all
gets ‘whispery’…”
“You just go to sleep, child,” said Alice, pulling
off her socks, “and don’t you scream and wake your
poor Pa.”
36 / Beehive

nightmare: a bad
dream

But the same old nightmare came — the butcher
with a knife and a rope, who came nearer and
nearer, smiling that dreadful smile, while she could
not move, could only stand still, crying out,
“Grandma! Grandma!” She woke shivering to see
Father beside her bed, a candle in his hand.
“What’s the matter?” he said.
11.
“Oh, a butcher — a knife — I want Grannie.” He
blew out the candle, bent down and caught up the
child in his arms, carrying her along the passage
to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed.
He put away the paper, then carefully tucked up
the child. He lay down beside her. Half asleep still,
still with the butcher’s smile all about her it seemed,
she crept close to him, snuggled her head under
his arm, held tightly to his shirt.
Then the dark did not matter; she lay still.
“Here, rub your feet against my legs and get
them warm,” said Father.
12.
Tired out, he slept before the little girl. A funny
feeling came over her. Poor Father, not so big, after
all — and with no one to look after him. He was
harder than Grandmother, but it was a nice
hardness. And every day he had to work and was too
tired to be a Mr Macdonald… She had torn up all his
beautiful writing… She stirred suddenly, and sighed.
“What’s the matter?” asked her father. “Another
dream?”
“Oh,” said the little girl, “my head’s on your heart.
I can hear it going. What a big heart you’ve got,
Father dear.”

tucked up: covered
up nicely in bed
snuggled: moved into
a warm, comfortable
position, close to
another person

KATHERINE MANSFIELD

The Little Girl / 37

Thinking about the T
Tee xt
I. Given below are some emotions that Kezia felt. Match the emotions in Column A
with the items in Column B.
A
1. fear or terror
2. glad sense of relief
3. a “funny” feeling, perhaps
of understanding

B
(i) father comes into her room to give
her a goodbye kiss
(ii) noise of the carriage grows fainter
(iii) father comes home
(iv) speaking to father
(v) going to bed when alone at home
(vi) father comforts her and falls asleep
(vii) father stretched out on the sofa,
snoring

II. Answer the following questions in one or two sentences.
1. Why was Kezia afraid of her father?
2. Who were the people in Kezia’s family?
3. What was Kezia’s father’s routine
(i) before going to his office?
(ii) after coming back from his office?
(iii) on Sundays?
4. In what ways did Kezia’s grandmother encourage her to get to know her
father better?
III. Discuss these questions in class with your teacher and then write down your
answers in two or three paragraphs each.
1. Kezia’s efforts to please her father resulted in displeasing him very much.
How did this happen?
2. Kezia decides that there are “different kinds of fathers”. What kind of father
was Mr Macdonald, and how was he different from Kezia’s father?
3. How does Kezia begin to see her father as a human being who needs her
sympathy?

Thinking about Language
I. Look at the following sentence.
There was a glad sense of relief when she heard the noise of the carriage growing
fainter.. .
Here, glad means happy about something.
Glad, happy, pleased, delighted, thrilled and overjoyed are synonyms (words or
38 / Beehive

expressions that have the same or nearly the same meaning.) However, they
express happiness in certain ways.
Read the sentences below.
• She was glad when the meeting was over.
• The chief guest was pleased to announce the name of the winner.
1. Use an appropriate word from the synonyms given above in the following
sentences. Clues are given in brackets.
by the news of her brother’s wedding. (very pleased)

(i) She was
(ii) I was
excited about)

to be invited to the party. (extremely pleased and

(iii) She was

at the birth of her granddaughter. (extremely happy)

(iv) The coach was
(v) She was very
that has happened)

with his performance. (satisfied about)
with her results. (happy about something

2. Study the use of the word big in the following sentence.
He was so big — his hands and his neck, especially his mouth…
Here, big means large in size.
Now, consult a dictionary and find out the meaning of big in the following
sentences. The first one has been done for you.
(i) You are a big girl now.

older

(ii) T oday you are going to take the biggest decision of your car eer.
(iii) Their project is full of big ideas.
(iv) Cricket is a big game in our country.
(v) I am a big fan of Lata Mangeskar.
(vi) You have to cook a bit more as my friend is a big eater.
(vii) What a big heart you’ve got, Father dear.
II. Verbs of Reporting
Study the following sentences.
• “What!” screamed Mother.
• “N-n-no”, she whispered.
• “Sit up,” he ordered.
The italicised words ar e verbs of reporting. We quote or report what someone
has said or thought by using a reporting verb. Every reporting clause contains
a reporting verb. For example:
• He promised to help in my project.
• “How are you doing?” Seema asked.
The Little Girl / 39

We use verbs of reporting to advise, order, report statements, thoughts,
intentions, questions, requests, apologies, manner of speaking and so on.
1. Underline the verbs of reporting in the following sentences.
(i) He says he will enjoy the ride.
(ii) Father mentioned that he was going on a holiday.
(iii) No one told us that the shop was closed.
(iv) He answered that the price would go up.
(v) I wondered why he was screaming.
(vi) Ben told her to wake him up.
(vii) Ratan apologised for coming late to the party.
2. Some verbs of reporting are given in the box. Choose the appropriate verbs
and fill in the blanks in the following sentences.
were complaining shouted replied
remarked
ordered suggested
(i) “I am not afraid,”

the woman.

(ii) “Leave me alone,” my mother
(iii) The children

.
that the roads were crowded and noisy.
the master.

(iv) “Perhaps he isn’t a bad sort of a chap after all,”
(v) “Let’s go and look at the school ground,”
(vi) The traffic police

the sports teacher.

all the passers-by to keep off the road.

Speaking
Form pairs or groups and discuss the following questions.
1. This story is not an Indian story. But do you think there are fathers, mothers
and grandmothers like the ones portrayed in the story in our own country?
2. Was Kezia’s father right to punish her? What kind of a person was he?
You might find some of these words useful in describing him:
undemonstrative loving strict hard-working
responsible
unkind disciplinarian short-tempered
affectionate
caring
indifferent

Writing
Has your life been different from or similar to that of Kezia when you were a
child? Has your perception about your parents changed now? Do you find any
change in your parents’ behaviour vis-à-vis yours? Who has become more
understanding? What steps would you like to take to build a relationship based
on understanding? Write three or four paragraphs (150–200 words) discussing
these issues from your own experience.
40 / Beehive

Rain on the Roof
When the sky is covered with dark clouds and it starts raining,
have you ever listened to the patter of soft rain on the roof ?
What thoughts flashed through your mind as you heard this
melody of nature? Read the poem to find out what the poet
dreamed of while listening to the rain.

When the humid shadows hover
Over all the starry spheres
And the melancholy darkness
Gently weeps in rainy tears,
What a bliss to press the pillow
Of a cottage-chamber bed
And lie listening to the patter
Of the soft rain overhead!
Every tinkle on the shingles
Has an echo in the heart;
And a thousand dreamy fancies
Into busy being start,
And a thousand recollections
Weave their air-threads into woof,
As I listen to the patter
Of the rain upon the roof.
Now in memory comes my mother,
As she used in years agone,
To regard the darling dreamers
Ere she left them till the dawn:
O! I feel her fond look on me
As I list to this refrain
Which is played upon the shingles
By the patter of the rain.
COATES K INNEY

G LOSSARY
tinkle: short, light ringing sounds
shingles: rectangular wooden tiles used on roofs
woof: weft, i.e. the threads woven across the loom
ere: old poetic word for ‘before’
refrain: a repeated part of a song or a poem; here, the sound of the rain
list: old poetic word for ‘listen’

Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. What do the following phrases mean to you? Discuss in class.
(i) humid shadows
(ii) starry spheres
(iii) what a bliss
(iv) a thousand dreamy fancies into busy being start
(v) a thousand recollections weave their air -threads into woof
2. What does the poet like to do when it rains?
3. What is the single major memory that comes to the poet? Who are the “darling
dreamers” he refers to?
4. Is the poet now a child? Is his mother still alive?
II. 1. When you were a young child, did your mother tuck you in, as the poet’s
did?
2. Do you like rain? What do you do when it rains steadily or heavily as
described in the poem?
3. Does everybody have a cosy bed to lie in when it rains? Look around you and
describe how different kinds of people or animals spend time, seek shelter
etc. during rain.

All that I am or ever hope it be, I owe to my
angel Mother.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN

42 / Beehive

