WHILE the class was circling the room, the monitor
from the principal’s office brought Miss Mason a note.
Miss Mason read it several times and studied it
thoughtfully for a while. Then she clapped her hands.
“Attention, class. Everyone back to their seat.”
When the shuffling of feet had stopped and the
room was still and quiet, Miss Mason said, “I have a
letter from Wanda’s father that I want to read to you.”
Miss Mason stood there a moment and the
silence in the room grew tense and expectant. The
teacher adjusted her glasses slowly and deliberately.
Her manner indicated that what was coming — this
letter from Wanda’s father — was a matter of great
importance. Everybody listened closely as Miss listened closely
listened with
Mason read the brief note.
Dear Teacher:
My Wanda will not come to your school any more. Jake
also. Now we move away to big city. No more holler ‘Pollack’.
No more ask why funny name. Plenty of funny names in
the big city.
Yours truly,
Jan Petronski

A deep silence met the reading of this letter.
Miss Mason took off her glasses, blew on them and
wiped them on her soft white handkerchief. Then
she put them on again and looked at the class.
When she spoke her voice was very low.
“I am sure that none of the boys and girls in
Room Thirteen would purposely and deliberately
hurt anyone’s feelings because his or her name
happened to be a long, unfamiliar one. I prefer

attention

First Flight
74

to think that what was said was said in
thoughtlessness. I know that all of you feel the way
I do, that this is a very unfortunate thing to have
happened — unfortunate and sad, both. And I want
you all to think about it.”
The first period was a study period. Maddie tried
to prepare her lessons, but she could not put her
mind on her work. She had a very sick feeling in the
bottom of her stomach. True, she had not enjoyed
listening to Peggy ask Wanda how many dresses she
had in her closet, but she had said nothing. She had
stood by silently, and that was just as bad as what
Peggy had done. Worse. She was a coward. At least
Peggy hadn’t considered they were being mean but
she, Maddie, had thought they were doing wrong.
She could put herself in Wanda’s shoes.
Goodness! Wasn’t there anything she could do?
If only she could tell Wanda she hadn’t meant to
hurt her feelings. She turned around and stole a
glance at Peggy, but Peggy did not look up. She
seemed to be studying hard. Well, whether Peggy
felt badly or not, she, Maddie, had to do something.
She had to find Wanda Petronski. Maybe she had
not yet moved away. Maybe Peggy would climb the
Heights with her, and they would tell Wanda she
had won the contest, that they thought she was
smart and the hundred dresses were beautiful.
Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.

What did Mr Petronski’s letter say?
Is Miss Mason angry with the class, or is she unhappy and upset?
How does Maddie feel after listening to the note from Wanda’s father?
What does Maddie want to do?

damp and dismal
wet and sad (here,
expressing a state of
hopelessness)

75

The Hundred Dresses ñII

When school was dismissed in the afternoon,
Peggy said, with pretended casualness, “Hey, let’s
go and see if that kid has left town or not.”
So Peggy had had the same idea! Maddie glowed.
Peg was really all right.
The two girls hurried out of the building, up the
street toward Boggins Heights, the part of town that
wore such a forbidding air on this kind of a
November afternoon, drizzly, damp and dismal.
“Well, at least,” said Peggy gruffly, “I never did
call her a foreigner or make fun of her name. I
never thought she had the sense to know we were
making fun of her anyway. I thought she was too
dumb. And gee, look how she can draw!”
Maddie could say nothing. All she hoped was that
they would find Wanda. She wanted to tell her that
they were sorry they had picked on her, and how
wonderful the whole school thought she was, and
please, not to move away and everybody would be nice.
She and Peggy would fight anybody who was not nice.
The two girls hurried on. They hoped to get to
the top of the hill before dark.
“I think that’s where the Petronskis live,” said
Maddie, pointing to a little white house. Wisps of
old grass stuck up here and there along the pathway
like thin kittens. The house and its sparse little
yard looked shabby but clean. It reminded Maddie
of Wanda’s one dress, her faded blue cotton dress,
shabby but clean.
There was not a sign of life about the house.
Peggy knocked firmly on the door, but there was no
answer. She and Maddie went around to the back
yard and knocked there. Still there was no answer.

First Flight
76

There was no doubt about it. The Petronskis were
gone. How could they ever make amends?
They turned slowly and made their way back
down the hill.
“Well, anyway,” said Peggy, “she’s gone now, so
what can we do? Besides, when I was asking her
about all her dresses, she probably was getting good
ideas for her drawings. She might not even have
won the contest, otherwise.”
Maddie turned this idea carefully over in her
head, for if there were anything in it she would not
have to feel so badly. But that night she could not
get to sleep. She thought about Wanda and her faded
blue dress and the little house she had lived in. And
she thought of the glowing picture those hundred
dresses made — all lined up in the classroom. At
last Maddie sat up in bed and pressed her forehead
tight in her hands and really thought. This was the
hardest thinking she had ever done. After a long,
long time, she reached an important conclusion.
She was never going to stand by and say
nothing again.
If she ever heard anybody picking on someone
because they were funny looking or because they
had strange names, she’d speak up. Even if it meant
losing Peggy’s friendship. She had no way of making
things right with Wanda, but from now on she would
never make anybody else that unhappy again.

(to) make amends
to show that one is
sorry by doing
something good

picking on
someone
treating someone
unkindly, unfairly
criticising them

Oral Comprehension Check
1. What excuses does Peggy think up for her behaviour? Why?
2. What are Maddie’s thoughts as they go to Boggins Heights?
3. Why does Wanda’s house remind Maddie of Wanda’s blue dress?

4. What does Maddie think hard about? What important decision
does she come to?

77

The Hundred Dresses ñII

On Saturday Maddie spent the afternoon with
Peggy. They were writing a letter to Wanda Petronski.
It was just a friendly letter telling about the contest
and telling Wanda she had won. They told her how
pretty her drawings were. And they asked her if
she liked where she was living and if she liked her
new teacher. They had meant to say they were sorry,
but it ended up with their just writing a friendly
letter, the kind they would have written to any good
friend, and they signed it with lots of X’s for love.
They mailed the letter to Boggins Heights, writing
‘Please Forward’ on the envelope.
Days passed and there was no answer, but the
letter did not come back, so maybe Wanda had
received it. Perhaps she was so hurt and angry she
was not going to answer. You could not blame her.
Weeks went by and still Wanda did not answer.
Peggy had begun to forget the whole business, and
Maddie put herself to sleep at night making speeches
about Wanda, defending her from great crowds of
girls who were trying to tease her with, “How many
dresses have you got?” And before Wanda could press
her lips together in a tight line, the way she did
before answering, Maddie would cry out, “Stop!”
Then everybody would feel ashamed the way she
used to feel.
Now it was Christmas time and there was snow
on the ground. Christmas bells and a small tree
decorated the classroom. On the last day of school
before the holidays, the teacher showed the class a
letter she had received that morning.

“You remember Wanda Petronski, the gifted little
artist who won the drawing contest? Well, she has
written me, and I am glad to know where she lives,
because now I can send her medal. I want to read
her letter to you.”
The class sat up with a sudden interest and
listened intently.
Dear Miss Mason,

First Flight

How are you and Room Thirteen? Please tell the girls they
can keep those hundred dresses, because in my new house
I have a hundred new ones, all lined up in my closet. I’d
like that girl Peggy to have the drawing of the green dress
with the red trimming, and her friend Maddie to have the
blue one. For Christmas, I miss that school and my new
teacher does not equalise with you. Merry Christmas to
you and everybody.

78

Yours truly,
Wanda Petronski

On the way home from school Maddie and Peggy
held their drawings very carefully. All the houses had
wreaths and holly in the windows. Outside the grocery
store, hundreds of Christmas trees were stacked, and
in the window, candy peppermint sticks and
cornucopias of shiny transparent paper were strung.
The air smelled like Christmas and light shining
everywhere reflected different colours on the snow.
“Boy!” said Peggy, “this shows she really likes
us. It shows she got our letter and this is her way of
saying that everything’s all right. And that’s that.”
“I hope so,” said Maddie sadly. She felt sad
because she knew she would never see the little
tight-lipped Polish girl again and couldn’t ever really
make things right between them.
She went home and she pinned her drawing
over a torn place in the pink-flowered wallpaper in
the bedroom. The shabby room came alive from
the brilliancy of the colours. Maddie sat down on
her bed and looked at the drawing. She had stood
by and said nothing, but Wanda had been nice to
her, anyway.

cornucopias
decorative
containers (usually
full of flowers and
fruits)

Tears blurred her eyes and she gazed for a long
time at the picture. Then hastily she rubbed her
eyes and studied it intently. The colours in the dress
were so vivid that she had scarcely noticed the face
and head of the drawing. But it looked like her,
Maddie! It really looked like her own mouth. Why it
really looked like her own self! Wanda had really
drawn this for her. Excitedly, she ran over to Peggy’s.
“Peg!” she said, “let me see your picture.”
“What’s the matter?” asked Peggy, as they clattered
up to her room where Wanda’s drawing was lying
face down on the bed. Maddie carefully raised it.
“Look! She drew you. That’s you!” she exclaimed.
And the head and face of this picture did look like
Peggy.
“What did I say!” said Peggy, “She must have
really liked us, anyway.”
“Yes, she must have,” agreed Maddie, and she
blinked away the tears that came every time she
thought of Wanda standing alone in that sunny spot
in the school yard, looking stolidly over at the group
of laughing girls after she had walked off, after she
had said, “Sure, a hundred of them, all lined up.”

1. Why do you think Wanda’s family moved to a different city? Do you think life
there was going to be different for their family?
2. Maddie thought her silence was as bad as Peggy’s teasing. Was she right?
3. Peggy says, “I never thought she had the sense to know we were making fun
of her anyway. I thought she was too dumb. And gee, look how she can
draw!” What led Peggy to believe that Wanda was dumb? Did she change her
opinion later?

The Hundred Dresses ñII

Oral Comprehension Check
1. What did the girls write to Wanda?
2. Did they get a reply? Who was more anxious for a reply, Peggy or
Maddie? How do you know?
3. How did the girls know that Wanda liked them even though they had
teased her?

79

4. What important decision did Maddie make? Why did she have to think hard
to do so?
5. Why do you think Wanda gave Maddie and Peggy the drawings of the dresses?
Why are they surprised?
6. Do you think Wanda really thought the girls were teasing her? Why or Why not?

I. Here are thirty adjectives describing human qualities. Discuss them with
your partner and put them in the two word webs (given below) according to
whether you think they show positive or negative qualities. You can consult
a dictionary if you are not sure of the meanings of some of the words. You
may also add to the list the positive or negative ‘pair’ of a given word.

First Flight

kind, sarcastic, courteous, arrogant, insipid, timid, placid, cruel, haughty,
proud, zealous, intrepid, sensitive, compassionate, introverted, stolid,
cheerful, contented, thoughtless, vain, friendly, unforgiving, fashionable,
generous, talented, lonely, determined, creative, miserable, complacent

80

Positive

Negative

II. What adjectives can we use to describe Peggy, Wanda and Maddie? You
can choose adjectives from the list above. You can also add some of
your own.
1. Peggy
2. Wanda
3. Maddie
III. 1. Find the sentences in the story with the following phrasal verbs.
lined up

thought up

took off

stood by

2. Look up these phrasal verbs in a dictionary to find out if they can be
used in some other way. (Look at the entries for line, think, take
and stand in the dictionary.) Find out what other prepositions can
go with these verbs. What does each of these phrasal verbs mean?
3. Use at least five such phrasal verbs in sentences of your own.
IV. Colours are used to describe feelings, moods and emotions. Match the
following ‘colour expressions’ with a suggested paraphrase.
(i) the Monday morning
blues
(ii) go red in the face

– feel embarrassed/angry/ashamed

81
– feel very sick, as if about to vomit

(iii) look green

– sadness or depression after a weekend of fun

(iv) the red carpet

– the sign or permission to begin an action

(v) blue-blooded

– a sign of surrender or acceptance of defeat;
a wish to stop fighting
– in an unlawful act; while doing something
wrong

(vii) a blackguard

– a photographic print of building plans; a
detailed plan or scheme

(viii) a grey area

– land around a town or city
construction is prohibited by law

where

(ix) a white flag

– an area of a subject or a situation where
matters are not very clear

(x) a blueprint

– a dishonest person with no sense of right or
wrong

(xi) red-handed
(xii) the green light

– a special welcome
– of noble birth or from a royal family

The Hundred Dresses ñII

(vi) a green belt

Role Play
The story of Wanda Petronski presents many characters engaged in many kinds
of behaviour (teasing, playing, sitting in class…). Form groups. Choose an episode
or episodes from the story. Assign roles to each member of the group from that
episode, and try to act it out like a play, using the words in the story.

First Flight

1. Look again at the letter which Wanda’s father writes to Miss Mason, Wanda’s
teacher. Mr Petronski is not quite aware how to write a formal letter in English.
Can you rewrite it more appropriately? Discuss the following with your partner
before you do so.
The format of a formal letter: How to begin the letter and how to end it; the
language of the letter needs to be formal. (Avoid informal words like “holler”
and fragments like “No more ask why funny name.”) Write complete sentences.

82

2. Are you interested in drawing and painting? Ritu Kumar, one of India’s best
known dress designers, has no formal training in designing. She started by
sketching ideas for her own dresses, and getting them stitched by a tailor.
Ritu’s friends liked her dresses so much that they asked her to design clothes
for them, and even paid her for it!
Imagine you are going to make a career out of your hobby. What sort of
things will you need to learn? Write a paragraph or two on this topic after
consulting an expert or doing reference work on your chosen area.
3. Rewrite a part of the story as if Wanda is telling us her own story.

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Narrated the story of Wanda Petronski, a poor little Polish girl in an American school,
and how her amazing drawing skills made her classmates feel ashamed about how
they had treated her.

WHAT YOU CAN DO
Help your students conduct a survey in their class to find out about the different talents
that their classmates possess — anything from cooking to painting to singing to gardening.
Divide the class into two equal sections, A and B. Each student from Section A talks
with one student from Section B, and they interview each other for five or ten minutes,
so that at the end of that time all the students have been interviewed. Then about five
students from each section (more if there is time) talk about the talents of the person
they interviewed. Make sure that some of the more ‘marginalised’ students from your
class (each class has some of them) have their moment of ‘fame.’
This exercise can be done after Units 5 and 6 have been completed, so that
students understand the point of the exercise better.

Animals
The poet tells us that he feels more at home with animals than
humans, whom he finds complicated and false.

I think I could turn and live with animals, they are
so placid and self-contain’d,
I stand and look at them long and long.
They do
They do
They do
Not one

not sweat and whine about their condition,
not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
is dissatisfied, not one is demented with
the mania of owning things,
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that
lived thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.
So they show their relations to me and I accept them,
They bring me tokens of myself, they evince
them plainly in their possession
I wonder where they get those tokens,
Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?

WALT WHITMAN
[From ‘Song of Myself ’ in Leaves of Grass]
Walt Whitman (1819 – 92) is a major figure in early American poetry. In
an age when all poetry was rhymed and metrical, Whitman made a
break with tradition and wrote a revolutionary new kind of poetry in free
verse. He was a nonconformist in all respects, including his social life.

1. Notice the use of the word ‘turn’ in the first line, “I think I could turn and live
with animals…”. What is the poet turning from?
2. Mention three things that humans do and animals don’t.
3. Do humans kneel to other humans who lived thousands of years ago? Discuss
this in groups.

First Flight

4. What are the ‘tokens’ that the poet says he may have dropped long ago, and
which the animals have kept for him? Discuss this in class. (Hint: Whitman
belongs to the Romantic tradition that includes Rousseau and Wordsworth,
which holds that civilisation has made humans false to their own true nature.
What could be the basic aspects of our nature as living beings that humans
choose to ignore or deny?)

84

English is funny, because...
If the plural of tooth is teeth, why isn’t the plural
of booth beeth?

