BEFORE YOU READ
They say faith can move mountains. But what should we put our
faith in? This is the question this story delicately poses.
Lencho is a farmer who writes a letter to God when his crops
are ruined, asking for a hundred pesos. Does Lencho’s letter reach
God? Does God send him the money? Think what your answers to
these questions would be, and guess how the story continues, before
you begin to read it.
Activity
1. One of the cheapest ways to send money to someone is through
the post office. Have you ever sent or received money in this
way? Here’s what you have to do. (As you read the instructions,
discuss with your teacher in class the meanings of these words:
counter, counter clerk, appropriate, acknowledgement, counterfoil,
record. Consult a dictionary if necessary. Are there words
corresponding to these English words in your languages?)

FirstFlight

2. Fill out the Money Order form given below using the clues that
follow the form.

2

• Think about who you will send the money to, and how much.
You might want to send money for a magazine subscription,
or to a relative or a friend.
• Or you may fill out the form with yourself as sender and your
partner as receiver. Use a part of your pocket money, and
submit the form at the nearest post office to see how it’s done.
See how your partner enjoys getting money by post!
• Notice that the form has three parts — the Money Order form,
the part for official use and the Acknowledgement. What would
you write in the ‘Space for Communication’?
Now complete the following statements.
(i) In addition to the sender, the form has to be signed by the
(ii) The ‘Acknowledgement’ section of the form is sent back by
the post office to the
after the
signs it.
(iii) The ‘Space for Communication’ section is used for
(iv) The form has six sections. The sender needs to fill
out
sections and the receiver

A Letter to God

THE house — the only one in the entire valley — sat
on the crest of a low hill. From this height one crest
could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted top of a hill
with the flowers that always promised a good
harvest. The only thing the earth needed was a
downpour or at least a shower. Throughout the
morning Lencho — who knew his fields intimately
— had done nothing else but see the sky towards
the north-east.
“Now we’re really going to get some water, woman.”
The woman who was preparing supper, replied,
“Yes, God willing”. The older boys were working in
the field, while the smaller ones were playing near
the house until the woman called to them all, “Come
for dinner”. It was during the meal that, just as

3

FirstFlight
4

Lencho had predicted, big drops of rain began to
fall. In the north-east huge mountains of clouds
could be seen approaching. The air was fresh and
sweet. The man went out for no other reason than
to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body,
and when he returned he exclaimed, ‘‘These aren’t
raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins.
The big drops are ten cent pieces and the little ones
are fives.’’
With a satisfied expression he regarded the field
of ripe corn with its flowers, draped in a curtain of
rain. But suddenly a strong wind began to blow
and along with the rain very large hailstones began
to fall. These truly did resemble new silver coins.
The boys, exposing themselves to the rain, ran out
to collect the frozen pearls.
‘‘It’s really getting bad now,’’ exclaimed the man.
“I hope it passes quickly.” It did not pass quickly.
For an hour the hail rained on the house, the
garden, the hillside, the cornfield, on the whole
valley. The field was white, as if covered with salt.
Not a leaf remained on the trees. The corn was
totally destroyed. The flowers were gone from the
plants. Lencho’s soul was filled with sadness. When
the storm had passed, he stood in the middle of the
field and said to his sons, “A plague of locusts would

draped
covered (with cloth)

locusts
insects which fly in
big swarms (groups)
and destroy crops

have left more than this. The hail has left nothing.
This year we will have no corn.’’
That night was a sorrowful one.
“All our work, for nothing.”
‘‘There’s no one who can help us.”
“We’ll all go hungry this year.”
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What did Lencho hope for?
2. Why did Lencho say the raindrops were like ‘new coins’?
3. How did the rain change? What happened to Lencho’s fields?
4. What were Lencho’s feelings when the hail stopped?

5
conscience
an inner sense of
right and wrong

peso
currency of several
Latin American
countries

amiable
friendly and
pleasant

A Letter to God

But in the hearts of all who lived in that solitary
house in the middle of the valley, there was a single
hope: help from God.
“Don’t be so upset, even though this seems like
a total loss. Remember, no one dies of hunger.”
“That’s what they say: no one dies of hunger.”
All through the night, Lencho thought only of
his one hope: the help of God, whose eyes, as he
had been instructed, see everything, even what is
deep in one’s conscience. Lencho was an ox of a
man, working like an animal in the fields, but still
he knew how to write. The following Sunday, at
daybreak, he began to write a letter which he
himself would carry to town and place in the mail.
It was nothing less than a letter to God.
“God,” he wrote, “if you don’t help me, my family
and I will go hungry this year. I need a hundred
pesos in order to sow my field again and to live
until the crop comes, because the hailstorm... .”
He wrote ‘To God’ on the envelope, put the letter
inside and, still troubled, went to town. At the post
office, he placed a stamp on the letter and dropped
it into the mailbox.
One of the employees, who was a postman and
also helped at the post office, went to his boss
laughing heartily and showed him the letter to God.
Never in his career as a postman had he known
that address. The postmaster — a fat, amiable

FirstFlight
6

fellow — also broke out laughing, but almost
immediately he turned serious and, tapping the
letter on his desk, commented, “What faith! I wish I
had the faith of the man who wrote this letter.
Starting up a correspondence with God!”
So, in order not to shake the writer’s faith in God,
the postmaster came up with an idea: answer the
letter. But when he opened it, it was evident that to
answer it he needed something more than goodwill,
ink and paper. But he stuck to his resolution: he
asked for money from his employees, he himself gave
part of his salary, and several friends of his were
obliged to give something ‘for an act of charity’.
It was impossible for him to gather together the
hundred pesos, so he was able to send the farmer
only a little more than half. He put the money in an
envelope addressed to Lencho and with it a letter
containing only a single word as a signature: God.
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Who or what did Lencho have faith in? What did he do?
2. Who read the letter?
3. What did the postmaster do then?

The following Sunday Lencho came a bit earlier
than usual to ask if there was a letter for him.
It was the postman himself who handed the letter
to him while the postmaster, experiencing the
contentment of a man who has performed a good contentment
satisfaction
deed, looked on from his office.
Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on
seeing the money; such was his confidence — but
he became angry when he counted the money. God
could not have made a mistake, nor could he have
denied Lencho what he had requested.
Immediately, Lencho went up to the window to
ask for paper and ink. On the public writing-table,
he started to write, with much wrinkling of his brow,
caused by the effort he had to make to express his
ideas. When he finished, he went to the window to
buy a stamp which he licked and then affixed to

the envelope with a blow of his fist. The moment
the letter fell into the mailbox the postmaster went
to open it. It said: “God: Of the money that I asked
for, only seventy pesos reached me. Send me the
rest, since I need it very much. But don’t send it to
me through the mail because the post office
employees are a bunch of crooks. Lencho.”

1. Who does Lencho have complete faith in? Which sentences in the story tell
you this?
2. Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the
letter ‘God’?
3. Did Lencho try to find out who had sent the money to him? Why/Why not?
4. Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? What is the irony
in the situation? (Remember that the irony of a situation is an unexpected
aspect of it. An ironic situation is strange or amusing because it is the
opposite of what is expected.)

A Letter to God

Oral Comprehension Check
1. Was Lencho surprised to find a letter for him with money in it?
2. What made him angry?

7

5. Are there people like Lencho in the real world? What kind of a person would you
say he is? You may select appropriate words from the box to answer the question.
greedy
selfish

naive

stupid

comical

ungrateful

unquestioning

6. There are two kinds of conflict in the story: between humans and nature,
and between humans themselves. How are these conflicts illustrated?

I. Look at the following sentence from the story.
Suddenly a strong wind began to blow and along with the rain very large
hailstones began to fall.

FirstFlight

‘Hailstones’ are small balls of ice that fall like rain. A storm in which
hailstones fall is a ‘hailstorm’. You know that a storm is bad weather with
strong winds, rain, thunder and lightning.
There are different names in different parts of the world for storms,
depending on their nature. Can you match the names in the box with
their descriptions below, and fill in the blanks? You may use a dictionary
to help you.
gale,

whirlwind,

hurricane,

8

tornado,

cyclone,
typhoon

1. A violent tropical storm in which strong winds move in a circle:
__ __ c __ __ __ __
2. An extremely strong wind : __ a __ __
3. A violent tropical storm with very strong winds : __ __ p __ __ __ __
4. A violent storm whose centre is a cloud in the shape of a funnel:
__ __ __ n __ __ __
5. A violent storm with very strong winds, especially in the western Atlantic
Ocean: __ __ r __ __ __ __ __ __
6. A very strong wind that moves very fast in a spinning movement and
causes a lot of damage: __ __ __ __ l __ __ __ __
II. Notice how the word ‘hope’ is used in these sentences from the story:
(a) I hope it (the hailstorm) passes quickly.
(b) There was a single hope: help from God.
In the first example, ‘hope’ is a verb which means you wish for something to
happen. In the second example it is a noun meaning a chance for something
to happen.

Match the sentences in Column A with the meanings of ‘hope’ in Column B.
A

B

1. Will you get the subjects you want
to study in college?
I hope so.

– a feeling that something good will
probably happen

2. I hope you don’t mind my saying
this, but I don’t like the way you
are arguing.

– thinking that this would happen
(It may or may not have happened.)
– stopped believing that this good
thing would happen

3. This discovery will give new hope
to HIV/AIDS sufferers.

– wanting something to happen
(and thinking it quite possible)

4. We were hoping against hope that
the judges would not notice our
mistakes.

– showing concern that what you
say should not offend or disturb
the other person: a way of being
polite

5. I called early in the hope of
speaking to her before she went
to school.

– wishing for something to happen,
although this is very unlikely

6. Just when everybody had given up
hope, the fishermen came back,
seven days after the cyclone.
III. Relative Clauses
Look at these sentences

9

(a) All morning Lencho — who knew his fields intimately — looked at
the sky.
(b) The woman, who was preparing supper, replied, “Yes, God willing.’’

The relative clauses in (a) and (b) above are called non-defining, because
we already know the identity of the person they describe. Lencho is a
particular person, and there is a particular woman he speaks to. We don’t
need the information in the relative clause to pick these people out from a
larger set.
A non-defining relative clause usually has a comma in front of it and a
comma after it (some writers use a dash (—) instead, as in the story). If the
relative clause comes at the end, we just put a full stop.
Join the sentences given below using who, whom, whose, which, as
suggested.
1. I often go to Mumbai. Mumbai is the commercial capital of India. (which)
2. My mother is going to host a TV show on cooking. She cooks very
well. (who)

A Letter to God

The italicised parts of the sentences give us more information about Lencho
and the woman. We call them relative clauses. Notice that they begin with
a relative pronoun who. Other common relative pronouns are whom, whose,
and which.

3. These sportspersons are going to meet the President. Their performance
has been excellent. (whose)
4. Lencho prayed to God. His eyes see into our minds. (whose)
5. This man cheated me. I trusted him. (whom)
Sometimes the relative pronoun in a relative clause remains ‘hidden’. For
example, look at the first sentence of the story:
(a) The house — the only one in the entire valley — sat on the crest of a
low hill.
We can rewrite this sentence as:
(b) The house — which was the only one in the entire valley — sat on
the crest of a low hill.
In (a), the relative pronoun which and the verb was are not present.

FirstFlight

IV. Using Negatives for Emphasis

10

We know that sentences with words such as no, not or nothing show the
absence of something, or contradict something. For example:
(a) This year we will have no corn. (Corn will be absent)
(b) The hail has left nothing. (Absence of a crop)
(c) These aren’t raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins.
(Contradicts the common idea of what the drops of water falling from
the sky are)
But sometims negative words are used just to emphasise an idea. Look at
these sentences from the story:
(d) Lencho…had done nothing else but see the sky towards the northeast. (He had done only this)
(e) The man went out for no other reason than to have the pleasure of
feeling the rain on his body. (He had only this reason)
(f) Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on seeing the money.
(He showed no surprise at all)
Now look back at example (c). Notice that the contradiction in fact serves to
emphasise the value or usefulness of the rain to the farmer.
Find sentences in the story with negative words, which express the
following ideas emphatically.
1. The trees lost all their leaves.

2. The letter was addressed to God himself.

3. The postman saw this address for the first time in his career.

V. Metaphors
The word metaphor comes from a Greek word meaning ‘transfer’. Metaphors
compare two things or ideas: a quality or feature of one thing is transferred
to another thing. Some common metaphors are
• the leg of the table: The leg supports our body. So the object that supports
a table is described as a leg.
• the heart of the city: The heart is an important organ in the centre of our
body. So this word is used to describe the central area of a city.
In pairs, find metaphors from the story to complete the table below. Try
to say what qualities are being compared. One has been done for you.
Object

Metaphor

Cloud

Huge mountains
of clouds

Quality or Feature Compared
The mass or ‘hugeness’
of mountains

Raindrops

Hailstones

11

Locusts

An ox of a man

Have you ever been in great difficulty, and felt that only a miracle could
help you? How was your problem solved? Speak about this in class with
your teacher.

A Letter to God

An epidemic (a disease)
that spreads very rapidly
and leaves many people dead

Listen to the letter (given under ‘In This Lesson’) read out by your teacher/on
the audio tape. As you listen fill in the table given below.
The writer apologises (says sorry)
because
The writer has sent this to
the reader
The writer sent it in the
month of

FirstFlight

The reason for not writing
earlier

12

Sarah goes to

Who is writing to whom?
Where and when were they
last together?

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
• Introduced students to the story that they are going to read.
• Related a thought-provoking story about the nature of belief.
• Helped students, through an interesting activity, to understand something that
happens in the story — how to send money using a money order.
• Guided them through the reading activity by providing periodic comprehension checks
as they read, and checked for holistic understanding at the end of the reading activity.
• Provided interesting exercises to strengthen students’ grasp of the specific vocabulary
found in the story, and also introduced them to related vocabulary.
• Explained specific areas of grammar — non-defining relative clauses and the use of
negatives for emphasis — providing illustrations from the text, and exercises for practice.
• Explained what metaphors are, and helped students identify metaphors in the text
by providing clues.
• Provided a context for authentic speaking.
• Provided an interesting listening activity.

Given below is the passage for listening activity
Bhatt House
256, Circuit Road
Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
25 January 2006
Dear Arti,
How are you? I’m sorry I haven’t written for a very long time. I think I last
sent you a birthday card in the month of September 2005.
We have just moved house (see our new address above). This is our new
home. Sarah has just about started going to school. We have admitted her to
‘Little Feet’ as this is very close to our new home.
I’m sitting here by the window sill, writing to you. There is a slight drizzle outside
and I’m reminded of the good times we had together at Bangalore last year.
Do write back. Love,
Jaya

WHAT YOU CAN DO
Before You Read: Encourage students to share their ideas about what will happen in the
story.
Activity : Before filling out the form, get the students to read through the form and
decide which parts they should fill out, and which parts will be filled in by the postal
department. Ask a few students to volunteer to actually send a money order (the
amount need not be large) and share the experience with the rest of the class.

13

Reading: Break the text up into manageable chunks for reading (three paragraphs, for
example), and encourage students to read silently, on their own. Give them enough
time to read, and then discuss what they have read before going on to the next portion.
Use the ‘Oral Comprehension Checks’ in the appropriate places, and use the ‘Thinking
about the Text’ questions at the end of the passage to help them go beyond the text.

Speaking: Take the first turn — talk to the students about an instance from your own
life, or from that of someone you know.

A Letter to God

Grammar: After they have done the exercise, ask students to make their own sentences
with non-defining relative clauses — for example, ‘Meena, who’s a very clever girl, is
always first in class.’ Or, ‘Our gardener, who knows a lot about plants, loves to talk
about them.’

Dust of Snow
The way a crow
Shook down on me
The dust of snow
From a hemlock tree
Has given my heart
A change of mood
And saved some part
Of a day I had rued.

ROBERT FROST

hemlock: A poisonous plant (tree) with small white flowers
rued: held in regret

This poem presents a moment that seems simple, but has a larger significance.
[Compare this other quotation from Robert Frost: “Always, always a larger
significance... A little thing touches a larger thing.”)
1. What is a “dust of snow”? What does the poet say has changed his mood?
How has the poet’s mood changed?
2. How does Frost present nature in this poem? The following questions may
help you to think of an answer.
(i) What are the birds that are usually named in poems? Do you think a
crow is often mentioned in poems? What images come to your mind
when you think of a crow?
(ii) Again, what is “a hemlock tree”? Why doesn’t the poet write about a
more ‘beautiful’ tree such as a maple, or an oak, or a pine?
(iii) What do the ‘crow’ and ‘hemlock’ represent — joy or sorrow? What does
the dust of snow that the crow shakes off a hemlock tree stand for?
3. Have there been times when you felt depressed or hopeless? Have you
experienced a similar moment that changed your mood that day?

Fire and Ice
Some say the world will end in fire
Some say in ice.
From what I’ve tasted of desire
I hold with those who favour fire.
But if it had to perish twice,
I think I know enough of hate
To say that for destruction ice
Is also great
And would suffice.

ROBERT FROST

perish: die
suffice: be sufficient

1. There are many ideas about how the world will ‘end’. Do you think the world
will end some day? Have you ever thought what would happen if the sun got
so hot that it ‘burst’, or grew colder and colder?
2. For Frost, what do ‘fire’ and ‘ice’ stand for? Here are some ideas:
greed

avarice

cruelty

lust

conflict

fury

intolerance

rigidity

insensitivity

coldness

indifference

hatred

3. What is the rhyme scheme of the poem? How does it help in bringing out the
contrasting ideas in the poem?

