BEFORE YOU READ
Since the earliest times, humans have dreamt of conquering the
skies. Here are two stories about flying.
I. A young seagull is afraid to fly. How does he conquer his fear?
II. A pilot is lost in storm clouds. Does he arrive safe? Who helps
him?

I
His First Flight
THE young seagull was alone on his ledge. His two
brothers and his sister had already flown away the
day before. He had been afraid to fly with them.
Somehow when he had taken a little run forward to
the brink of the ledge and attempted to flap his
wings he became afraid. The great expanse of sea
stretched down beneath, and it was such a long
way down — miles down. He felt certain that his
wings would never support him; so he bent his head
and ran away back to the little hole under the ledge
where he slept at night. Even when each of his
brothers and his little sister, whose wings were far
shorter than his own, ran to the brink, flapped their
wings, and flew away, he failed to muster up courage
to take that plunge which appeared to him so
desperate. His father and mother had come around

ledge
a narrow horizontal
shelf projecting from
a wall or (here) a cliff

calling to him shrilly, upbraiding him, threatening
to let him starve on his ledge unless he flew away.
But for the life of him he could not move.
That was twenty-four hours ago. Since then
nobody had come near him. The day before, all day
long, he had watched his parents flying about with
his brothers and sister, perfecting them in the art
of flight, teaching them how to skim the waves and
how to dive for fish. He had, in fact, seen his older
brother catch his first herring and devour it,
standing on a rock, while his parents circled around
raising a proud cackle. And all the morning the
whole family had walked about on the big plateau
midway down the opposite cliff taunting him with
his cowardice.
The sun was now ascending the sky, blazing on
his ledge that faced the south. He felt the heat
because he had not eaten since the previous nightfall.
He stepped slowly out to the brink of the ledge,
and standing on one leg with the other leg hidden
under his wing, he closed one eye, then the other,

upbraiding
scolding

(to) skim
to move lightly just
above a surface
(here, the sea)
herring
a soft-finned sea fish

33

and pretended to be falling asleep. Still they took
no notice of him. He saw his two brothers and his
sister lying on the plateau dozing with their heads
sunk into their necks. His father was preening the
feathers on his white back. Only his mother was
looking at him. She was standing on a little high
hump on the plateau, her white breast thrust
forward. Now and again, she tore at a piece of fish
that lay at her feet and then scrapped each side of
her beak on the rock. The sight of the food maddened
him. How he loved to tear food that way, scrapping
his beak now and again to whet it.
“Ga, ga, ga,” he cried begging her to bring him
some food. “Gaw-col-ah,” she screamed back
derisively. But he kept calling plaintively, and
after a minute or so he uttered a joyful scream.
His mother had picked up a piece of the fish and
was flying across to him with it. He leaned out

34

preening
making an effort to
maintain feathers

(to) whet
to sharpen
derisively
in a manner
showing someone
that she/he is stupid

eagerly, tapping the rock with his feet, trying to
get nearer to her as she flew across. But when
she was just opposite to him, she halted, her
wings motionless, the piece of fish in her beak
almost within reach of his beak. He waited a
moment in surprise, wondering why she did not
come nearer, and then, maddened by hunger, he
dived at the fish. With a loud scream he fell
outwards and downwards into space. Then a
monstrous terror seized him and his heart stood
still. He could hear nothing. But it only lasted a
minute. The next moment he felt his wings spread
outwards. The wind rushed against his breast
feathers, then under his stomach, and against his
wings. He could feel the tips of his wings cutting
through the air. He was not falling headlong now.
He was soaring gradually downwards and outwards.
He was no longer afraid. He just felt a bit dizzy.
Then he flapped his wings once and he soared
upwards. “Ga, ga, ga, Ga, ga, ga, Gaw-col-ah,” his
mother swooped past him, her wings making a
loud noise. He answered her with another scream.
Then his father flew over him screaming. He saw
his two brothers and his sister flying around him
curveting and banking and soaring and diving.
Then he completely forgot that he had not always
been able to fly, and commended himself to dive
and soar and curve, shrieking shrilly.
He was near the sea now, flying straight over
it, facing straight out over the ocean. He saw a
vast green sea beneath him, with little ridges
moving over it and he turned his beak sideways
and cawed amusedly.
His parents and his brothers and sister had
landed on this green flooring ahead of him. They
were beckoning to him, calling shrilly. He dropped
his legs to stand on the green sea. His legs sank
into it. He screamed with fright and attempted to
rise again flapping his wings. But he was tired and
weak with hunger and he could not rise, exhausted

dizzy
an uncomfortable
feeling of spinning
around and losing
one’s balance

curveting
leaping like a horse
banking
flying with one wing
higher than the other

35

by the strange exercise. His feet sank into the green
sea, and then his belly touched it and he sank no
farther. He was floating on it, and around him his
family was screaming, praising him and their beaks
were offering him scraps of dog-fish.
He had made his first flight.

1. Why was the young seagull afraid to fly? Do you think all young birds are
afraid to make their first flight, or are some birds more timid than others?
Do you think a human baby also finds it a challenge to take its first steps?
2. “The sight of the food maddened him.” What does this suggest? What
compelled the young seagull to finally fly?
3. “They were beckoning to him, calling shrilly.” Why did the seagull’s father
and mother threaten him and cajole him to fly?
4. Have you ever had a similar experience, where your parents encouraged
you to do something that you were too scared to try? Discuss this in pairs
or groups.

36

5. In the case of a bird flying, it seems a natural act, and a foregone conclusion
that it should succeed. In the examples you have given in answer to the
previous question, was your success guaranteed, or was it important for
you to try, regardless of a possibility of failure?

We have just read about the first flight of a young seagull. Your teacher will
now divide the class into groups. Each group will work on one of the following
topics. Prepare a presentation with your group members and then present it
to the entire class.
• Progression of Models of Airplanes
• Progression of Models of Motorcars
• Birds and Their Wing Span
• Migratory Birds — Tracing Their Flights

Write a short composition on your initial attempts at learning a skill. You could
describe the challenges of learning to ride a bicycle or learning to swim. Make it
as humorous as possible.

II
The Black Aeroplane
THE moon was coming up in the east, behind me,
and stars were shining in the clear sky above me.
There wasn’t a cloud in the sky. I was happy to be
alone high up above the sleeping countryside. I was
flying my old Dakota aeroplane over France back to
England. I was dreaming of my holiday and looking
forward to being with my family. I looked at my
watch: one thirty in the morning.
‘I should call Paris Control soon,’ I thought. As I
looked down past the nose of the aeroplane, I saw
the lights of a big city in front of me. I switched on
the radio and said, “Paris Control, Dakota DS 088
here. Can you hear me? I’m on my way to England.
Over.”
The voice from the radio answered me immediately:
“DS 088, I can hear you. You ought to turn twelve
degrees west now, DS 088. Over.”
I checked the map and the compass, switched
over to my second and last fuel tank, and turned
the Dakota twelve degrees west towards England.
‘I’ll be in time for breakfast,’ I thought. A good
big English breakfast! Everything was going well —
it was an easy flight.
Paris was about 150 kilometres behind me when
I saw the clouds. Storm clouds. They were huge.
They looked like black mountains standing in front
of me across the sky. I knew I could not fly up and
over them, and I did not have enough fuel to fly
around them to the north or south.
“I ought to go back to Paris,” I thought, but I
wanted to get home. I wanted that breakfast.
‘I’ll take the risk,’ I thought, and flew that old
Dakota straight into the storm.
Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black.
It was impossible to see anything outside the
aeroplane. The old aeroplane jumped and twisted
in the air. I looked at the compass. I couldn’t believe

37

38

my eyes: the compass was turning round and round
and round. It was dead. It would not work! The
other instruments were suddenly dead, too. I tried
the radio.
“Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me?”
There was no answer. The radio was dead too. I
had no radio, no compass, and I could not see where
I was. I was lost in the storm. Then, in the black
clouds quite near me, I saw another aeroplane. It
had no lights on its wings, but I could see it flying
next to me through the storm. I could see the pilot’s
face — turned towards me. I was very glad to see
another person. He lifted one hand and waved.
“Follow me,” he was saying. “Follow me.”
‘He knows that I am lost,’ I thought. ‘He’s trying
to help me.’
He turned his aeroplane slowly to the north, in
front of my Dakota, so that it would be easier for
me to follow him. I was very happy to go behind the
strange aeroplane like an obedient child.
After half an hour the strange black aeroplane
was still there in front of me in the clouds. Now

there was only enough fuel in the old Dakota’s last
tank to fly for five or ten minutes more. I was
starting to feel frightened again. But then he started
to go down and I followed through the storm.
Suddenly I came out of the clouds and saw two
long straight lines of lights in front of me. It was a
runway! An airport! I was safe! I turned to look for
my friend in the black aeroplane, but the sky was
empty. There was nothing there. The black
aeroplane was gone. I could not see it anywhere.
I landed and was not sorry to walk away from the
old Dakota near the control tower. I went and asked
a woman in the control centre where I was and who
the other pilot was. I wanted to say ‘Thank you’.
She looked at me very strangely, and then
laughed.
“Another aeroplane? Up there in this storm? No
other aeroplanes were flying tonight. Yours was the
only one I could see on the radar.”
So who helped me to arrive there safely without
a compass or a radio, and without any more fuel in
my tanks? Who was the pilot on the strange black
aeroplane, flying in the storm, without lights?

39

1. “I’ll take the risk.” What is the risk? Why does the narrator take it?
2. Describe the narrator’s experience as he flew the aeroplane into the storm.
3. Why does the narrator say, “I landed and was not sorry to walk away from
the old Dakota…”?
4. What made the woman in the control centre look at the narrator strangely?
5. Who do you think helped the narrator to reach safely? Discuss this among
yourselves and give reasons for your answer.

I. Study the sentences given below.
(a) They looked like black mountains.
(b) Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black.
(c) In the black clouds near me, I saw another aeroplane.
(d) The strange black aeroplane was there.
The word ‘black’ in sentences (a) and (c) refers to the very darkest colour.
But in (b) and (d) (here) it means without light/with no light.
‘Black’ has a variety of meanings in different contexts. For example:
(a) ‘I prefer black tea’ means ‘I prefer tea without milk’.

40

(b) ‘With increasing pollution the future of the world is black’ means
‘With increasing pollution the future of the world is very depressing/
without hope’.
Now, try to guess the meanings of the word ‘black’ in the sentences
given below. Check the meanings in the dictionary and find out whether
you have guessed right.
1. Go and have a bath; your hands and face are absolutely black.

2. The taxi-driver gave Ratan a black look as he crossed the road when the
traffic light was green.
3. The bombardment of Hiroshima is one of the blackest crimes against
humanity.
4. Very few people enjoy Harold Pinter’s black comedy.
5. Sometimes shopkeepers store essential goods to create false scarcity
and then sell these in black.
6. Villagers had beaten the criminal black and blue.

II. Look at these sentences taken from the lesson you have just read:
(a) I was flying my old Dakota aeroplane.
(b) The young seagull had been afraid to fly with them.
In the first sentence the author was controlling an aircraft in the air. Another
example is: Children are flying kites. In the second sentence the seagull
was afraid to move through the air, using its wings.
Match the phrases given under Column A with their meanings given
under Column B:
A

B

1. Fly a flag

– Move quickly/suddenly

2. Fly into rage

– Be successful

3. Fly along

– Display a flag on a long pole

4. Fly high

– Escape from a place

5. Fly the coop

– Become suddenly very angry

III. We know that the word ‘fly’ (of birds/insects) means to move through
air using wings. Tick the words which have the same or nearly the same
meaning.

41
swoop

flit

paddle

flutter

ascend

float

ride

skim

sink

dart

hover

glide

descend

soar

shoot

spring

stay

fall

sail

flap

Have you ever been alone or away from home during a thunderstorm? Narrate
your experience in a paragraph.

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Provided two stories about flying — one about a bird, another about a human being in
a plane.

WHAT YOU CAN DO
• As they read the story of the seagull, students can be asked to imagine how a baby
learns to walk, and compare and contrast the two situations.

• After they read the second story students should be asked for their ideas about the
phantom plane: Was it really there or did the pilot imagine it? If the students feel it
was really there, who could have been piloting it?
• Ask students to narrate their own stories about flying. It could be about flying in an
airplane, or flying a kite, or about watching a bird flying — in short, anything to do
with flight. Give students ten minutes to think quietly about the topic — during this
time, they can make notes about what they want to say. Then ask for volunteer
speakers.

Compound Words Whose Parts Mean Just
the Opposite or Something Else
• Quicksand works slowly

42

• There in no egg in eggplant nor ham in
hamburger; neither apple nor pine in pineapple.
• Boxing rings are square

This humorous poem suggests some dangerous ways to identify (or
‘tell’) wild animals! Read it aloud, keeping to a strong and regular
rhythm.

If ever you should go by chance
To jungles in the east;
And if there should to you advance
A large and tawny beast,
If he roars at you as you’re dyin’
You’ll know it is the Asian Lion...

Or if some time when roaming round,
A noble wild beast greets you,
With black stripes on a yellow ground,
Just notice if he eats you.
This simple rule may help you learn
The Bengal Tiger to discern.

If strolling forth, a beast you view,
Whose hide with spots is peppered,
As soon as he has lept on you,
You’ll know it is the Leopard.
’Twill do no good to roar with pain,
He’ll only lep and lep again.

If when you’re walking round your yard
You meet a creature there,
Who hugs you very, very hard,
Be sure it is a Bear.
If you have any doubts, I guess
He’ll give you just one more caress.

Though to distinguish beasts of prey
A novice might nonplus,
The Crocodile you always may
Tell from the Hyena thus:
Hyenas come with merry smiles;
But if they weep they’re Crocodiles.

44

The true Chameleon is small,
A lizard sort of thing;
He hasn’t any ears at all,
And not a single wing.
If there is nothing on the tree,
’Tis the chameleon you see.

CAROLYN WELLS

ground: background
discern: make out; identify
hide: animal skin
peppered: here, covered with spots
caress: a gentle, loving touch
novice: someone new to a job
(be) nonplus (sed) (usually only in the passive): (be) puzzle(d), confuse(d),
surprise(d)

1. Does ‘dyin’ really rhyme with ‘lion’? Can you say it in such a way that it does?
2. How does the poet suggest that you identify the lion and the tiger? When
can you do so, according to him?
3. Do you think the words ‘lept‘ and ‘lep’ in the third stanza are spelt correctly?
Why does the poet spell them like this?
4. Do you know what a ‘bearhug’ is? It’s a friendly and strong hug — such as
bears are thought to give, as they attack you! Again, hyenas are thought to
laugh, and crocodiles to weep (‘crocodile tears’) as they swallow their victims.
Are there similar expressions and popular ideas about wild animals in your
own language(s)?
5. Look at the line “A novice might nonplus”. How would you write this
‘correctly’? Why is the poet’s ‘incorrect’ line better in the poem?
6. Can you find other examples of poets taking liberties with language, either
in English or in your own language(s)? Can you find examples of humorous
poems in your own language(s)?
7. Much of the humour in the poem arises from the way language is used,
although the ideas are funny as well. If there are particular lines in the
poem that you especially like, share these with the class, speaking briefly
about what it is about the ideas or the language that you like or find funny.

45

English is funny, because...
We have noses that run and feet that smell

A boy loses a ball. He is very upset. A ball doesn’t cost much, nor is
it difficult to buy another ball. Why then is the boy so upset? Read
the poem to see what the poet thinks has been lost, and what the
boy has to learn from the experience of losing something.

What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
What, what is he to do? I saw it go
Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
Merrily over — there it is in the water!
No use to say ‘O there are other balls’:
An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
All his young days into the harbour where
His ball went. I would not intrude on him;
A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
He senses first responsibility
In a world of possessions. People will take
Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy.
And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
Knowing what every man must one day know
And most know many days, how to stand up.

JOHN BERRYMAN

O there are other balls: The words suggest that the loss is not important enough
to worry about
shaking grief: sadness which greatly affects the boy
rigid: stiff

(to) intrude on: here, to enter a situation where one is not welcome
a dime: ten cents (U.S.)
desperate: hopeless
epistemology of loss: understanding the nature of loss — what it means to
lose something
epistemology: The Greek word episteme means ‘knowledge’ (it comes from a
word meaning ‘to understand, to know’). Epistemology is the study of the
nature of knowledge itself.

In pairs, attempt the following questions.
1. Why does the poet say, “I would not intrude on him”? Why doesn’t he offer
him money to buy another ball?
2. “… staring down/All his young days into the harbour where/His ball went …”
Do you think the boy has had the ball for a long time? Is it linked to the
memories of days when he played with it?
3. What does “in the world of possessions” mean?
4. Do you think the boy has lost anything earlier? Pick out the words that
suggest the answer.
5. What does the poet say the boy is learning from the loss of the ball? Try to
explain this in your own words.
6. Have you ever lost something you liked very much? Write a paragraph
describing how you felt then, and saying whether — and how — you got over
your loss.

47

