BEFORE

YOU

READ

Activity
Discuss in class
1. What images — of people and of places — come to your mind,
when you think of our country?
2. What parts of India have you lived in, or visited? Can you name
some popular tourist destinations?
3. You may know that apart from the British, the Dutch and the
French, the Portuguese have also played a part in the history of
our country. Can you say which parts of India show French
and Portuguese influences?
4. Can you say which parts of India grow (i) tea, (ii) coffee?

I
A Baker from Goa
This is a pen-portrait of a traditional Goan village baker who still
has an important place in his society.

OUR elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically
about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese
and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves
might have vanished but the makers are still there.
We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders
and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, timetested furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces
has not yet been extinguished. The thud and jingle of

reminiscing
nostalgically
thinking fondly of
the past

First Flight
86

the traditional baker’s bamboo, heralding his arrival
in the morning, can still be heard in some places.
Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries
on the family profession. These bakers are, even today,
known as pader in Goa.
During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to
be our friend, companion and guide. He used to
come at least twice a day. Once, when he set out in
the morning on his selling round, and then again,
when he returned after emptying his huge basket.
The jingling thud of his bamboo woke us up from
sleep and we ran to meet and greet him. Why was
it so? Was it for the love of the loaf? Not at all. The
loaves were bought by some Paskine or Bastine,
the maid-servant of the house! What we longed for
were those bread-bangles which we chose carefully.
Sometimes it was sweet bread of special make.
The baker made his musical entry on the scene
with the ‘jhang, jhang’ sound of his specially made
bamboo staff. One hand supported the basket on
his head and the other banged the bamboo on the
ground. He would greet the lady of the house with
“Good morning” and then place his basket on the
vertical bamboo. We kids would be pushed aside
with a mild rebuke and the loaves would be delivered
to the servant. But we would not give up. We would
climb a bench or the parapet and peep into the
basket, somehow. I can still recall the typical
fragrance of those loaves. Loaves for the elders and
the bangles for the children. Then we did not even
care to brush our teeth or wash our mouths
properly. And why should we? Who would take the
trouble of plucking the mango-leaf for the
toothbrush? And why was it necessary at all? The
tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash
and clean up everything so nicely, after all!

heralding
announcing

rebuke
an expression of
disapproval; a
scolding
fragrance
scent

Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.

What are the elders in Goa nostalgic about?
Is bread-making still popular in Goa? How do you know?
What is the baker called?
When would the baker come everyday? Why did the children
run to meet him?

87
plump physique
pleasantly fat body
open testimony
public statement
about a character or
quality

Oral Comprehension Check
1. Match the following. What is a must
(i) as marriage gifts?
– cakes and bolinhas
(ii) for a party or a feast?
– sweet bread called bol
(iii) for a daughter’s engagement?
– bread
(iv) for Christmas?
– sandwiches
2. What did the bakers wear: (i) in the Portuguese days? (ii) when the
author was young?
3. Who invites the comment — “he is dressed like a pader”? Why?
4. Where were the monthly accounts of the baker recorded?
5. What does a ‘jackfruit -like appearance’ mean?

Glimpses of India

Marriage gifts are meaningless without the sweet
bread known as the bol, just as a party or a feast
loses its charm without bread. Not enough can be
said to show how important a baker can be for a
village. The lady of the house must prepare
sandwiches on the occasion of her daughter’s
engagement. Cakes and bolinhas are a must for
Christmas as well as other festivals. Thus, the
presence of the baker’s furnace in the village is
absolutely essential.
The baker or bread-seller of those days had a
peculiar dress known as the kabai. It was a singlepiece long frock reaching down to the knees. In our
childhood we saw bakers wearing a shirt and
trousers which were shorter than full-length ones
and longer than half pants. Even today, anyone
who wears a half pant which reaches just below
the knees invites the comment that he is dressed
like a pader!
The baker usually collected his bills at the end
of the month. Monthly accounts used to be recorded
on some wall in pencil. Baking was indeed a
profitable profession in the old days. The baker and
his family never starved. He, his family and his
servants always looked happy and prosperous. Their
plump physique was an open testimony to this. Even
today any person with a jackfruit-like physical
appearance is easily compared to a baker.

1. Which of these statements are correct?
(i) The pader was an important person in the village in old times.
(ii) Paders still exist in Goan villages.
(iii) The paders went away with the Portuguese.
(iv) The paders continue to wear a single-piece long frock.
(v) Bread and cakes were an integral part of Goan life in the old days.
(vi) Traditional bread-baking is still a very profitable business.
(vii) Paders and their families starve in the present times.
2. Is bread an important part of Goan life? How do you know this?
3. Tick the right answer. What is the tone of the author when he says the following?
(i) The thud and the jingle of the traditional baker’s bamboo can still be
heard in some places. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad)

First Flight

(ii) Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries on the family
profession. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad)
(iii) I still recall the typical fragrance of those loaves. (nostalgic, hopeful,
naughty)

88

(vi) The baker and his family never starved. They always looked happy and
prosperous. (matter-of-fact, hopeful, sad)

(iv) The tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash and clean up
everything so nicely, after all. (naughty, angry, funny)
(v) Cakes and bolinhas are a must for Christmas as well as other festivals.
(sad, hopeful, matter-of-fact)

I. In this extract, the author talks about traditional bread-baking during his
childhood days. Complete the following table with the help of the clues on
the left. Then write a paragraph about the author's childhood days.
Clues
the way bread was baked
the way the pader sold bread
what the pader wore
when the pader was paid
how the pader looked

Author’s childhood days

II. 1. Compare the piece from the text (on the left below) with the other piece
on Goan bakers (on the right). What makes the two texts so different?
Are the facts the same? Do both writers give you a picture of the baker?
Our elders are often heard
reminiscing nostalgically about
those good old Portuguese days,
the Portuguese and their famous
loaves of bread. Those eaters of
loaves might have vanished but
the makers are still there. We still
have amongst us the mixers, the
moulders and those who bake the
loaves. Those age-old, time-tested
furnaces still exist. The fire in the
furnaces had not yet been
extinguished. The thud and the
jingle of the traditional baker’s
bamboo, heralding his arrival in
the morning, can still be heard
in some places.
May be the father is not alive
but the son still carries on the
family profession.

After Goa’s liberation, people used
to say nostalgically that the
Portuguese bread vanished with
the paders. But the paders have
managed to survive because they
have perfected the art of door-todoor delivery service. The paders
pick up the knowledge of breadmaking from traditions in the
family. The leavened, oven-baked
bread is a gift of the Portuguese
to India.
[Adapted from Nandakumar
Kamat’s ‘The Unsung Lives of Goan
Paders’]

89

2. Now find a travel brochure about a place you have visited. Look at the
description in the brochure. Then write your own account, adding details
from your own experience, to give the reader a picture of the place, rather
than an impersonal, factual description.

2. There are a number of craft-based professions which are dying out. Pick one
of the crafts below. Make a group presentation to the class about the skills
required, and the possible reasons for the decline of the craft. Can you
think of ways to revive these crafts?
(i) Pottery
(ii) Batik work
(iii) Dhurri (rug) weaving
(iv) Embroidery

(v) Carpentry
(vi) Bamboo weaving
(vii) Making jute products
(viii) Handloom

Glimpses of India

1. In groups, collect information on how bakeries bake bread now and how the
process has changed over time.

II
Coorg

First Flight

Coorg is coffee country, famous for its rainforests and spices.

90

MIDWAY between Mysore and the coastal town of
Mangalore sits a piece of heaven that must have
drifted from the kingdom of god. This land of rolling
hills is inhabited by a proud race of martial men,
beautiful women and wild creatures.
Coorg, or Kodagu, the smallest district of
Karnataka, is home to evergreen rainforests, spices
and coffee plantations. Evergreen rainforests cover
thirty per cent of this district. During the monsoons,
it pours enough to keep many visitors away. The
season of joy commences from September and
continues till March. The weather is perfect, with
some showers thrown in for
good measure. The air
breathes of invigorating
coffee. Coffee estates and
colonial bungalows stand
tucked under tree canopies
in prime corners.
The fiercely independent
people of Coorg are possibly
of Greek or Arabic descent.
As one story goes, a part of
Alexander’s army moved
south along the coast and
settled here when return
became impractical. These
people married amongst the
locals and their culture is
apparent in the martial
traditions, marriage and
religious rites, which are
distinct from the Hindu
mainstream. The theory of
Arab origin draws support
Traditional Coorgi dress
from the long, black coat

drifted from
been carried along
gently by air
martial
having to do with
war

canopies
roof-like coverings
that form shelters
prime
here, best

mainstream
a tradition which
most people follow

with an embroidered waist-belt worn by the Kodavus.
Known as kuppia, it resembles the kuffia worn by
the Arabs and the Kurds.
Coorgi homes have a tradition of hospitality, and
they are more than willing to recount numerous
tales of valour related to their sons and fathers.
The Coorg Regiment is one of the most decorated in
the Indian Army, and the first Chief of the Indian
Army, General Cariappa, was a Coorgi. Even now,
Kodavus are the only people in India permitted to
carry firearms without a licence.
The river, Kaveri, obtains its water from the hills
and forests of Coorg. Mahaseer — a large freshwater
fish — abound in these waters. Kingfishers dive for
their catch, while squirrels and langurs drop
partially eaten fruit for the mischief of enjoying the
splash and the ripple effect in the clear water.
Elephants enjoy being bathed and scrubbed in the
river by their mahouts.
The most laidback individuals become converts
to the life of high-energy adventure with river rafting,
canoeing, rappelling, rock climbing and mountain

tales of valour
stories of courage
and bravery, usually
in war
most decorated
having received the
maximum number
of awards for
bravery in war
laidback
relaxed; not in a hurry
rafting
travelling in a river
in a raft ( a floating
platform made by
tying planks
together)
canoeing
travelling in a river
in a canoe (a large,
narrow boat)
rappelling
going down a cliff by
sliding down a rope

91

Glimpses of India

Basket-seller from Coorg

First Flight

biking. Numerous walking trails in this region are
a favourite with trekkers.
Birds, bees and butterflies are there to give you
company. Macaques, Malabar squirrels, langurs and
slender loris keep a watchful eye from the tree canopy.
I do, however, prefer to step aside for wild elephants.
The climb to the Brahmagiri hills brings you
into a panoramic view of the entire misty landscape
of Coorg. A walk across the rope bridge leads to the
sixty-four-acre island of Nisargadhama. Running
into Buddhist monks from India’s largest Tibetan
settlement, at nearby Bylakuppe, is a bonus. The
monks, in red, ochre and yellow robes, are amongst
the many surprises that wait to be discovered by
visitors searching for the heart and soul of India,
right here in Coorg.

92

trails
paths created by
walking

panoramic view
a view of a wide
area of land

FACT FILE

How to Reach
Madikeri, the district headquarters, is the only gateway to Coorg. The misty
hills, lush forests and coffee plantations will cast a spell on you. Find a
resort, coffee estate or stay in a home for a truly Coorgi experience.
By Air: The nearest airports are Mangalore (135 km) and Bangalore (260
km). There are flights to Mangalore from Mumbai, and to Bangalore from
Ahmedabad, Chennai, Delhi, Goa, Hyderabad, Kochi, Kolkata, Mumbai and
Pune.
By Rail: The nearest railheads are at Mysore, Mangalore and Hassan.
By Road: There are two routes to Coorg from Bangalore. Both are almost
the same distance (around 250-260 km). The route via Mysore is the most
frequented one. The other route is via Neelamangal, Kunigal,
Chanrayanapatna.

1. Where is Coorg?
2. What is the story about the Kodavu people’s descent?
3. What are some of the things you now know about
(i) the people of Coorg?
(ii) the main crop of Coorg?
(iii) the sports it offers to tourists?

(iv) the animals you are likely to see in Coorg?
(v) its distance from Bangalore, and how to get there?
4. Here are six sentences with some words in italics. Find phrases from the
text that have the same meaning. (Look in the paragraphs indicated)
(i) During monsoons it rains so heavily that tourists do not visit Coorg. (para 2)
(ii) Some people say that Alexander’s army moved south along the coast
and settled there. (para 3)
(iii) The Coorg people are always ready to tell stories of their sons’ and fathers’
valour. (para 4)
(iv) Even people who normally lead an easy and slow life get smitten by the
high-energy adventure sports of Coorg. (para 6)
(v) The theory of the Arab origin is supported by the long coat with
embroidered waist-belt they wear. (para 3)
(vi) Macaques, Malabar squirrels observe you carefully from the tree canopy.
(para 7)

Collocations
Certain words ‘go together’. Such ‘word friends’ are called collocations. The
collocation of a word is ‘the company it keeps’.
For example, look at the paired sentences and phrases below. Which is a common
collocation, and which one is odd? Strike out the odd sentence or phrase.
(a) • ‘How old are you?’

93

(b) • a pleasant person

• ‘How young are you?’

• a pleasant pillow

1. Here are some nouns from the text.
monks

surprise

experience

weather

tradition

Work with a partner and discuss which of the nouns can collocate with
which of the adjectives given below. The first one has been done for you.
unique

terrible

(i) culture:
(ii) monks:
(iii) surprise:
(iv) experience:
(v) weather:
(vi) tradition

unforgettable

serious

ancient

unique culture, ancient culture

wide

sudden

Glimpses of India

culture

2. Complete the following phrases from the text. For each phrase, can you
find at least one other word that would fit into the blank?
(i) tales of

(ii) coastal

(iii) a piece of
(v)

(iv) evergreen
plantations

(vi)

bridge

(vii) wild
You may add your own examples to this list.

First Flight

III
Tea from Assam

94

Pranjol, a youngster from Assam, is Rajvir’s classmate at school
in Delhi. Pranjol’s father is the manager of a tea-garden in Upper
Assam and Pranjol has invited Rajvir to visit his home during the
summer vacation.

“CHAI-GARAM... garam-chai,” a vendor called out in a
high-pitched voice.
He came up to their window and asked,”Chai, sa’ab?”
“Give us two cups,” Pranjol said.
They sipped the steaming hot liquid. Almost
everyone in their compartment was drinking tea too.
“Do you know that over eighty crore cups of tea
are drunk every day throughout the world?” Rajvir said.
“Whew!” exclaimed Pranjol. “Tea really is very
popular.”
The train pulled out of the station. Pranjol buried
his nose in his detective book again. Rajvir too was
an ardent fan of detective stories, but at the moment
he was keener on looking at the beautiful scenery.
It was green, green everywhere. Rajvir had never
seen so much greenery before. Then the soft green
paddy fields gave way to tea bushes.
It was a magnificent view. Against the backdrop
of densely wooded hills a sea of tea bushes stretched
as far as the eye could see. Dwarfing the tiny tea
plants were tall sturdy shade-trees and amidst the
orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures.

95

Glimpses of India

In the distance was an ugly building with smoke
billowing out of tall chimneys.
“Hey, a tea garden!” Rajvir cried excitedly.
Pranjol, who had been born and brought up on
a plantation, didn’t share Rajvir’s excitement.
“Oh, this is tea country now,” he said. “Assam has
the largest concentration of plantations in the world.
You will see enough gardens to last you a lifetime!”
“I have been reading as much as I could about
tea,” Rajvir said. “No one really knows who
discovered tea but there are many legends.”
“What legends?”
“Well, there’s the one about the Chinese emperor
who always boiled water before drinking it. One
day a few leaves of the twigs burning under the pot
fell into the water giving it a delicious flavour. It is
said they were tea leaves.”
“Tell me another!” scoffed Pranjol.
“We have an Indian legend too. Bodhidharma, an
ancient Buddhist ascetic, cut off his eyelids because
he felt sleepy during meditations. Ten tea plants
grew out of the eyelids. The leaves of these plants
when put in hot water and drunk banished sleep.
“Tea was first drunk in China,” Rajvir added,
“as far back as 2700 B.C.! In fact words such as
tea, ‘chai’ and ‘chini’ are from Chinese. Tea came to
Europe only in the sixteenth century and was drunk
more as medicine than as beverage.”
The train clattered into Mariani junction. The
boys collected their luggage and pushed their way
to the crowded platform.
Pranjol’s parents were waiting for them.
Soon they were driving towards Dhekiabari, the
tea-garden managed by Pranjol’s father.
An hour later the car veered sharply off the main
road. They crossed a cattle-bridge and entered
Dhekiabari Tea Estate.
On both sides of the gravel-road were acre upon
acre of tea bushes, all neatly pruned to the same
height. Groups of tea-pluckers, with bamboo baskets
on their backs, wearing plastic aprons, were
plucking the newly sprouted leaves.

Pranjol’s father slowed down to allow a tractor,
pulling a trailer-load of tea leaves, to pass.
“This is the second-flush or sprouting period,
isn’t it, Mr Barua?” Rajvir asked. “It lasts from May
to July and yields the best tea.”
“You seem to have done your homework before
coming,” Pranjol’s father said in surprise.
“Yes, Mr Barua,” Rajvir admitted. “But I hope to
learn much more while I’m here.”

First Flight

I. 1. Look at these words: upkeep, downpour, undergo, dropout, walk-in. They
are built up from a verb (keep, pour, go, drop, walk) and an adverb or a
particle (up, down, under, out, in).

96

Use these words appropriately in the sentences below. You may consult
a dictionary.
(i) A heavy
Bay of Bengal.

has been forecast due to low pressure in the

(ii) Rakesh will

major surgery tomorrow morning.

(iii) My brother is responsible for the
(iv) The

of our family property.

rate for this accountancy course is very high.

(v) She went to the Enterprise Company to attend a
interview.
2. Now fill in the blanks in the sentences given below by combining the
verb given in brackets with one of the words from the box as appropriate.
over

by

through

out

up

down

(i) The Army attempted unsuccessfully to
(throw)
(ii) Scientists are on the brink of a major
(break)

the Government.
in cancer research.

(iii) The State Government plans to build a
to speed up traffic on the main highway. (pass)

for Bhubaneswar

(iv) Gautama’s
on life changed when he realised that the world
is full of sorrow. (look)
(v) Rakesh seemed unusually

after the game. (cast)

II. Notice how these -ing and -ed adjectives are used.
(a) Chess is an interesting game.

I am very interested in chess.

(b) Going trekking in the Himalayas
this summer is an exciting idea.

We are very excited about the
trek.

(c) Are all your school books this
boring?

He was bored as he had no
friends there.

The -ing adjectives show the qualities that chess, trekking, or these books
have: they cause interest, excitement, or boredom in you. The —ed/—en
adjectives show your mental state, or your physical state: how you feel in
response to ideas, events or things.
1. Think of suitable -ing or -ed adjectives to answer the following
questions. You may also use words from those given above.
How would you describe
(i) a good detective serial on television?
(ii) a debate on your favourite topic ‘Homework Should Be Banned’?
(iii) how you feel when you stay indoors due to incessant rain?
(iv) how you feel when you open a present?
(v) how you feel when you watch your favourite programme on

97

television?
(vi) the look on your mother’s face as you waited in a queue?
(vii) how you feel when tracking a tiger in a tiger reserve forest?

2. Now use the adjectives in the exercise above, as appropriate, to write
a paragraph about Coorg.

1. Read the following passage about tea.
India and tea are so intertwined together that life without the brew is
unimaginable. Tea entered our life only in the mid-nineteenth century
when the British started plantations in Assam and Darjeeling! In the
beginning though, Indians shunned the drink as they thought it was a
poison that led to umpteen diseases. Ironically, tea colonised Britain
where it became a part of their social diary and also led to the
establishment of numerous tea houses.

Glimpses of India

(viii) the story you have recently read, or a film you have seen?

Today, scientific research across the world has attempted to establish
the beneficial qualities of tea — a fact the Japanese and the Chinese
knew anyway from ancient times, attributing to it numerous medicinal
properties.
[Source: ‘History: Tea Anytime’ by Ranjit Biswas from
Literary Review, The Hindu, 1 October 2006]

First Flight

Collect information about tea, e.g. its evolution as a drink, its beneficial
qualities. You can consult an encyclopedia or visit Internet websites. Then
form groups of five and play the following roles: Imagine a meeting of a tea
planter, a sales agent, a tea lover (consumer), a physician and a tea-shop
owner. Each person in the group has to put forward his/her views about
tea. You may use the following words and phrases.
• I feel ...

• It is important to know ...

• I disagree with you ...

• I think that tea ...

• I would like you to know ...

• I agree with ...

• It is my feeling ...

• I suggest ...

• May I know why you ...

• I am afraid ...

2. You are the sales executive of a famous tea company and you have been asked
to draft an advertisement for the product. Draft the advertisement using the
information you collected for the role play. You can draw pictures or add
photographs and make your advertisement colourful.

98
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Given a picture of three different regions of India, giving an idea of how varied and
charming and beautiful our country is.

WHAT YOU CAN DO
Get your students to arrange an exhibition of photographs of different places in India
— good sources are travel articles in Sunday newspapers, or in travel magazines, or in
brochures available at travel agents. Ask students to bring in two or three pictures
each, accompanied by a short, neatly hand-written write-up on the place shown in the
pictures. Arrange them on your classroom walls. Let the students study them. They can
then discuss, and later vote on the place they would most like to see.

The Trees
Can there be a forest without trees? Where are the trees in this
poem, and where do they go?

The trees inside are moving out into the forest,
the forest that was empty all these days
where no bird could sit
no insect hide
no sun bury its feet in shadow
the forest that was empty all these nights
will be full of trees by morning.
All night the roots work
to disengage themselves from the cracks
in the veranda floor.
The leaves strain toward the glass
small twigs stiff with exertion
long-cramped boughs shuffling under the roof
like newly discharged patients
half-dazed, moving
to the clinic doors.
I sit inside, doors open to the veranda
writing long letters
in which I scarcely mention the departure
of the forest from the house.
The night is fresh, the whole moon shines
in a sky still open
the smell of leaves and lichen
still reaches like a voice into the rooms.

My head is full of whispers
which tomorrow will be silent.
Listen. The glass is breaking.
The trees are stumbling forward
into the night. Winds rush to meet them.
The moon is broken like a mirror,
its pieces flash now in the crown
of the tallest oak.

ADRIENNE RICH

First Flight

Adrienne Rich was born in Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. in 1929. She is
the author of nearly twenty volumes of poetry, and has been called a
feminist and a radical poet.

to disengage themselves: to separate themselves
strain: make efforts to move
bough: branch
shuffling: moving repeatedly from one position to another

100

lichen: crusty patches or bushy growth on tree trunks/bare ground formed by
association of fungus and alga.

1.

(i) Find, in the first stanza, three things that cannot happen in a treeless
forest.
(ii) What picture do these words create in your mind: “… sun bury its feet
in shadow…”? What could the poet mean by the sun’s ‘feet’?

2.

(i) Where are the trees in the poem? What do their roots, their leaves, and
their twigs do?
(ii) What does the poet compare their branches to?

3.

(i) How does the poet describe the moon: (a) at the beginning of the third
stanza, and (b) at its end? What causes this change?
(ii) What happens to the house when the trees move out of it?
(iii) Why do you think the poet does not mention “the departure of the forest
from the house” in her letters? (Could it be that we are often silent
about important happenings that are so unexpected that they embarrass
us? Think about this again when you answer the next set of questions.)

4. Now that you have read the poem in detail, we can begin to ask what the
poem might mean. Here are two suggestions. Can you think of others?
(i) Does the poem present a conflict between man and nature? Compare it
with A Tiger in the Zoo. Is the poet suggesting that plants and trees,
used for ‘interior decoration’ in cities while forests are cut down, are
‘imprisoned’, and need to ‘break out’?
(ii) On the other hand, Adrienne Rich has been known to use trees as a
metaphor for human beings; this is a recurrent image in her poetry.
What new meanings emerge from the poem if you take its trees to be
symbolic of this particular meaning?
5. You may read the poem ‘On Killing a Tree’ by Gieve Patel (Beehive – Textbook
in English for Class IX, NCERT). Compare and contrast it with the poem you
have just read.

Homophones
Can you find the words below that are spelt
similarly, and sometimes even pronounced
similarly, but have very different meanings? Check
their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary.

101

• The dump was so full that it had to refuse more
refuse.
• The insurance was invalid for the invalid.

The Trees

• When shot at, the dove dove into the bushes.

