BEFORE YOU READ
Anneliese Marie ‘Anne’ Frank (12
June 1929 – February/March
1945) was a German – born
Jewish girl who wrote while in
hiding with her family and four
friends in Amsterdam during the
German occupation of the
Netherlands in World War II. Her
family had moved to Amsterdam
after the Nazis gained power in
“This is a photo as I would wish Germany but were trapped when
myself to look all the time. Then
the Nazi occupation extended into
I would, maybe, have a chance
the Netherlands. As persecutions
to come to Hollywood.”
– Anne Frank, 10 October 1942 against the Jewish population
increased, the family went into
hiding in July 1942 in hidden rooms in her father Otto Frank’s
office building. After two years in hiding, the group was betrayed
and transported to the concentration camp system where Anne died
of typhus in Bergen-Belsen within days of her sister, Margot Frank.
Her father, Otto, the only survivor of the group, returned to Amsterdam
after the war ended, to find that her diary had been saved. Convinced
that it was a unique record, he took action to have it published in
English under the name The Diary of a Young Girl.
The diary was given to Anne Frank for her thirteenth birthday
and chronicles the events of her life from 12 June 1942 until its
final entry of 1 August 1944. It was eventually translated from its
original Dutch into many languages and became one of the world’s
most widely read books. There have also been several films,
television and theatrical productions, and even an opera, based on
the diary. Described as the work of a mature and insightful mind,
the diary provides an intimate examination of daily life under Nazi
occupation. Anne Frank has become one of the most renowned and
discussed of the Holocaust victims.

Activity
1. Do you keep a diary? Given below under ‘A’ are some terms we
use to describe a written record of personal experience. Can
you match them with their descriptions under ‘B’? (You may
look up the terms in a dictionary if you wish.)
A

(i) Journal
(ii) Diary
(iii) Log
(iv) Memoir(s)

B

– A book with a separate space or page for each
day, in which you write down your thoughts
and feelings or what has happened on that day
– A full record of a journey, a period of time, or
an event, written every day
– A record of a person’s own life and experiences
(usually, a famous person)
– A written record of events with times and
dates, usually official

2. Here are some entries from personal records. Use the definitions
above to decide which of the entries might be from a diary, a
journal, a log or a memoir.
(i) I woke up very late today and promptly got a scolding from
Mum! I can’t help it — how can I miss the FIFA World Cup
matches?
Ans:
Went to the office of the Director
Had lunch with Chairman
Received Rahul at the airport
Dinner at home

(iii) The ride to Ooty was uneventful. We rested for a while every
50 km or so, and used the time to capture the magnificent
landscape with my HandyCam. From Ooty we went on to
Bangalore.
What a contrast! The noise and pollution of this once-beautiful
city really broke my heart.
Ans:
(iv) This is how Raj Kapoor found me — all wet and ragged
outside R.K.Studios. He was then looking for just someone
like this for a small role in Mera Naam Joker, and he cast
me on the spot. The rest, as they say, is history!
Ans:

From the Diary of Anne Frank

(ii) 10:30 a.m.
01:00 p.m.
05:45 p.m.
09:30 p.m.
Ans:

49

First Flight
50

WRITING in a diary is a really strange experience for
someone like me. Not only because I’ve never written
anything before, but also because it seems to me
that later on neither I nor anyone else will be
interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old
schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn’t matter. I feel like
writing, and I have an even greater need to get all
kinds of things off my chest.
‘Paper has more patience than people.’ I thought
of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling
a little depressed and was sitting at home with my
chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering
whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I
was, brooding: Yes, paper does have more patience,
and since I’m not planning to let anyone else read
this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a
‘diary’, unless I should ever find a real friend, it
probably won’t make a bit of difference.
Now I’m back to the point that prompted me
to keep a diary in the first place: I don’t have a
friend.
Let me put it more clearly, since no one will
believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely
alone in the world. And I’m not. I have loving parents
and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about
thirty people I can call friends. I have a family,
loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I
seem to have everything, except my one true friend.
All I think about when I’m with friends is having a
good time. I can’t bring myself to talk about anything
but ordinary everyday things. We don’t seem to be
able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe
it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other. In
any case, that’s just how things are, and
unfortunately they’re not liable to change. This is
why I’ve started the diary.
To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend
in my imagination, I don’t want to jot down the
facts in this diary the way most people would do,
but I want the diary to be my friend, and I’m going
to call this friend ‘Kitty’.

listless
with no energy or
interest

confide
to tell personal
things privately to a
person that one
trusts

Oral Comprehension Check
1. What makes writing in a diary a strange experience for Anne Frank?
2. Why does Anne want to keep a diary?
3. Why did Anne think she could confide more in her diary than in people?

Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why does Anne provide a brief sketch of her life?
2. What tells you that Anne loved her grandmother?

plunked down (an
informal word)
put down in a casual
way

51

From the Diary of Anne Frank

Since no one would understand a word of my
stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I’d better
provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike
doing so.
My father, the most adorable father I’ve ever seen,
didn’t marry my mother until he was thirty-six and
she was twenty-five. My sister, Margot, was born
in Frankfurt in Germany in 1926. I was born on 12
June 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. My
father emigrated to Holland in 1933. My mother,
Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland
in September, while Margot and I were sent to
Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went
to Holland in December, and I followed in February,
when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday
present for Margot.
I started right away at the Montessori nursery
school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time
I started in the first form. In the sixth form my
teacher was Mrs Kuperus, the headmistress. At the
end of the year we were both in tears as we said a
heartbreaking farewell.
In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had
to have an operation, so my birthday passed with
little celebration.
Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows
how often I think of her and still love her. This
birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make
up for the other, and Grandma’s candle was lit along
with the rest.
The four of us are still doing well, and that brings
me to the present date of 20 June 1942, and the
solemn dedication of my diary.

First Flight

Saturday, 20 June 1942

52

Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The
reason, of course, is the forthcoming meeting in
which the teachers decide who’ll move up to the
next form and who’ll be kept back. Half the class is
making bets. G.N. and I laugh ourselves silly at the
two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques, who have
staked their entire holiday savings on their bet.
From morning to night, it’s “You’re going to pass”,
“No, I’m not”, “Yes, you are”, “No, I’m not”. Even G.’s
pleading glances and my angry outbursts can’t calm
them down. If you ask me, there are so many
dummies that about a quarter of the class should
be kept back, but teachers are the most
unpredictable creatures on earth.
I’m not so worried about my girlfriends and
myself. We’ll make it. The only subject I’m not sure
about is maths. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until
then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There
are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr
Keesing, the old fogey who teaches maths, was
annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
After several warnings, he assigned me extra
homework. An essay on the subject, ‘A Chatterbox’.
A chatterbox — what can you write about that? I’d
worry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the
title in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried
to keep quiet.
That evening, after I’d finished the rest of my
homework, the note about the essay caught my eye.
I began thinking about the subject while chewing
the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on
and leave big spaces between the words, but the
trick was to come up with convincing arguments to
prove the necessity of talking. I thought and
thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the
three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was
satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait
and that I would do my best to keep it under control,

quaking in its boots
shaking with fear
and nervousness

old fogey
an old-fashioned
person

ramble on
talk or write
aimlessly for long
convincing
argument
a statement made in
such a manner that
people believe it

but that I would never be able to cure myself of the
habit since my mother talked as much as I did if
not more, and that there’s not much you can do
about inherited traits.
Mr Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments,
but when I proceeded to talk my way through the
next lesson, he assigned me a second essay. This
time it was supposed to be on ‘An Incorrigible
Chatterbox’. I handed it in, and Mr Keesing had
nothing to complain about for two whole lessons.
However, during the third lesson he’d finally had
enough. “Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in
class, write an essay entitled — ‘Quack, Quack,
Quack, Said Mistress Chatterbox’.”

inherited traits
qualities (physical or
mental) that one gets
from one’s parents
incorrigible
something that
cannot be corrected
(usually a bad
quality)

53

From the Diary of Anne Frank

The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I’d
nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of ingenuity
chatterboxes. It was time to come up with originality and
something else, something original. My friend, inventiveness
Sanne, who’s good at poetry, offered to help me write
the essay from beginning to end in verse and I
jumped for joy. Mr Keesing was trying to play a
joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I’d make
sure the joke was on him.
I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was
about a mother duck and a father swan with three
baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the
father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Mr
Keesing took the joke the right way. He read the

poem to the class, adding his own comments, and
to several other classes as well. Since then I’ve been
allowed to talk and haven’t been assigned any extra
homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing’s always
making jokes these days.
Yours,
Anne
[Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl,
with slight adaptation]

First Flight

Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why was Mr Keesing annoyed with Anne? What did he ask her to do?
2. How did Anne justify her being a chatterbox in her essay?
3. Do you think Mr Keesing was a strict teacher?
4. What made Mr Keesing allow Anne to talk in class?

54

1. Was Anne right when she said that the world would not be interested in the
musings of a thirteen-year-old girl?
2. There are some examples of diary or journal entries in the ‘Before You Read’
section. Compare these with what Anne writes in her diary. What language
was the diary originally written in? In what way is Anne’s diary different?
3. Why does Anne need to give a brief sketch about her family? Does she treat
‘Kitty’ as an insider or an outsider?
4. How does Anne feel about her father, her grandmother, Mrs Kuperus and
Mr Keesing? What do these tell you about her?
5. What does Anne write in her first essay?
6. Anne says teachers are most unpredictable. Is Mr Keesing unpredictable?
How?
7. What do these statements tell you about Anne Frank as a person?
(i) We don’t seem to be able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe
it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other.
(ii) I don’t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people
would, but I want the diary to be my friend.
(iii) Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when
I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot.
(iv) If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the
class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable
creatures on earth.

(v) Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but
the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity
of talking.

I. Look at the following words.
headmistress

long-awaited

homework

notebook

stiff-backed

outbursts

These words are compound words. They are made up of two or more words.
Compound words can be:
• nouns: headmistress, homework, notebook, outbursts
• adjectives: long-awaited, stiff-backed
• verbs: sleep-walk, baby-sit
Match the compound words under ‘A’ with their meanings under ‘B’.
Use each in a sentence.
A
B
1. Heartbreaking – obeying and respecting the law
2. Homesick

– think about pleasant things, forgetting about the
present
– something produced by a person, machine or
organisation

4. Law-abiding

– producing great sadness

5. Overdo

– an occasion when vehicles/machines stop working

6. Daydream

– an informal word which means a very stupid person

7. Breakdown

– missing home and family very much

8. Output

– do something to an excessive degree

II. Phrasal Verbs
A phrasal verb is a verb followed by a preposition or an adverb. Its meaning
is often different from the meanings of its parts. Compare the meanings of
the verbs get on and run away in (a) and (b) below. You can easily guess their
meanings in (a) but in (b) they have special meanings.
(a) • She got on at Agra when the bus stopped for breakfast.
• Dev Anand ran away from home when he was a teenager.
(b) • She’s eager to get on in life. (succeed)
• The visitors ran away with the match. (won easily)

From the Diary of Anne Frank

3. Blockhead

55

Some phrasal verbs have three parts: a verb followed by an adverb and a
preposition.
(c) Our car ran out of petrol just outside the city limits.
(d) The government wants to reach out to the people with this new
campaign.
1. The text you’ve just read has a number of phrasal verbs commonly
used in English. Look up the following in a dictionary for their
meanings (under the entry for the italicised word).
(i) plunge (right) in

(iii) ramble on

(ii) kept back

(iv) get along with

First Flight

2. Now find the sentences in the lesson that have the phrasal verbs
given below. Match them with their meanings. (You have already
found out the meanings of some of them.) Are their meanings the
same as that of their parts? (Note that two parts of a phrasal verb
may occur separated in the text.)

56

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)

plunge in
kept back
move up
ramble on
get along with

–
–
–
–
–

calm down
stay in
make up for
hand in

–
–
–
–

speak or write without focus
stay indoors
make (them) remain quiet
have a good relationship with
give an assignment (homework) to a person in
authority (the teacher)
compensate
go straight to the topic
go to the next grade
not promoted

III. Idioms
Idioms are groups of words with a fixed order, and a particular meaning,
different from the meanings of each of their words put together. (Phrasal
verbs can also be idioms; they are said to be ‘idiomatic’ when their meaning
is unpredictable.) For example, do you know what it means to ‘meet one’s
match’ in English? It means to meet someone who is as good as oneself, or
even better, in some skill or quality. Do you know what it means to ‘let the
cat out of the bag’? Can you guess?
1. Here are a few sentences from the text which have idiomatic
expressions. Can you say what each means? (You might want to
consult a dictionary first.)
(i) Our entire class is quaking in its boots.

(ii) Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.

(iii) Mr Keesing was annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.

(iv) Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous
subject, but I’d make sure the joke was on him.

2. Here are a few more idiomatic expressions that occur in the text.
Try to use them in sentences of your own.
(i) caught my eye
(ii) he’d had enough

(iii) laugh ourselves silly
(iv) can’t bring myself to

IV. Do you know how to use a dictionary to find out the meanings of idiomatic
expressions? Take, for example, the expression caught my eye in the story.
Where — under which word — would you look for it in the dictionary?
Look for it under the first word. But if the first word is a ‘grammatical’ word
like a, the, for, etc., then take the next word. That is, look for the first
‘meaningful’ word in the expression. In our example, it is the word caught.
But you won’t find caught in the dictionary, because it is the past tense of
catch. You’ll find caught listed under catch. So you must look under catch for
the expression caught my eye. Which other expressions with catch are listed
in your dictionary?
Note that a dictionary entry usually first gives the meanings of the word
itself, and then gives a list of idiomatic expressions using that word. For
example, study this partial entry for the noun ‘eye’ from the Oxford Advanced
Learner’s Dictionary, 2005.

57

Eye
• Part of Body 1 [C] either of the two organs on the face that you see
with: The suspect has dark hair and green eyes.
• Ability to See 3 [sing.] the ability to see: A surgeon needs a good eye
and a steady hand.
• Way of Seeing 4 [C, usually sing.] a particular way of seeing sth: He
looked at the design with the eye of an engineer.
• Of Needle 5 [C] the hole in the end of a needle that you put the thread
through.
IDM be all eyes to be watching sb/sth carefully and with a lot of interest
before/in front of sb’s (very) eyes in sb’s presence; in front of sb: He had
seen his life’s work destroyed before his very eyes. Be up to your eyes in
sth to have a lot of sth to deal with: We’re up to our eyes in work.

From the Diary of Anne Frank

• Noun

You have read the expression ‘not to lose heart’ in this text. Now find
out the meanings of the following expressions using the word ‘heart’.Use
each of them in a sentence of your own.
1. break somebody’s heart
2. close/dear to heart
3. from the (bottom of your) heart
4. have a heart
5. have a heart of stone
6. your heart goes out to somebody
V. Contracted Forms
When we speak, we use ‘contracted forms’ or short forms such as these:
can’t (for can not or cannot)

I’d (for I would or I had)

she’s (for she is)

First Flight

Notice that contracted forms are also written with an apostrophe to show a
shortening of the spelling of not, would, or is as in the above example.
Writing a diary is like speaking to oneself. Plays (and often, novels) also have
speech in written form. So we usually come across contracted forms in
diaries, plays and novels.
1. Make a list of the contracted forms in the text. Rewrite them as full
forms of two words.
For example:
I’ve = I have

58

2. We have seen that some contracted forms can stand for two different
full forms:
I’d = I had or I would
Find in the text the contracted forms that stand for two different
full forms, and say what these are.

Here is an extract adapted from a one-act play. In this extract, angry neighbours
who think Joe the Inventor’s new spinning machine will make them lose their
jobs come to destroy Joe’s model of the machine.
You’ve just seen how contracted forms can make a written text sound like actual
speech. Try to make this extract sound more like a real conversation by changing
some of the verbs back into contracted forms. Then speak out the lines.
[The door is flung open, and several men tramp in. They carry sticks, and one
of them, HOB, has a hammer.]
MOB

: Now where is your husband, mistress?

MARY

: In his bed. He is sick, and weary. You would not harm him!

HOB

: We are going to smash his evil work to pieces. Where is the
machine?

SECOND : On the table yonder.
MAN
HOB

: Then here is the end of it!
[HOB smashes the model. MARY screams.]

HOB

: And now for your husband!

MARY

: Neighbours, he is a sick man and almost a cripple. You would not
hurt him!

HOB

: He is planning to take away our daily bread… We will show him
what we think of him and his ways!

MARY

: You have broken his machine… You have done enough…

Now you know what a diary is and how to keep one. Can you keep a diary for a
week recording the events that occur? You may share your diary with your
class, if you wish to. Use the following hints to write your diary.
• Though your diary is very private, write as if you are writing for someone else.
• Present your thoughts in a convincing manner.
• Use words that convey your feelings, and words that ‘paint pictures’ for the
reader. Be brief.

59

‘Diary language’ has some typical features such as subjectless sentences (Got
up late in the morning), sentence fragments without subjects or verbs (…too
bad, boring, not good), contracted forms (they’re, I’ve, can’t, didn’t, etc.), and
everyday expressions which people use in speech. Remember not to use such
language in more formal kinds of writing.

Summary
This entry in the diary has been made on

by

who told Pepys about the fire was called

. The person

. She called at

the morning. Pepys went back to sleep because
in the morning. By then about
down. The fire had spread to
to the

in

. Pepys rose again at
houses had been burned

by London Bridge. Pepys then walked

along with Sir J. Robinson’s

.

From the Diary of Anne Frank

Your teacher will read out an extract from The Diary of Samuel Pepys (given on
the next page) about the great fire of London. As you listen complete this summary
of the happenings.

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
1.

Diary writing is one of the best ways to practise writing. Students do not have to
think up or imagine what to write about; they only have to find words to write
about what has happened. Initiate your students into the habit of keeping a diary.

2.

Anne Frank’s diary became a public document after World War II. Discuss with your
students diaries which became historical documents, such as Samuel Pepys’s diary.
You may draw students’ attention to different types of diaries, e.g. private diary,
general diary. Army officers, businessmen, doctors, executives, lawyers, motorists,
police officers keep a general diary to record events that happen during the day
and events that are scheduled for the day, such as appointments, meetings, things
to be done, etc.

3.

Passage for listening exercise:

First Flight

The Great Fire of London [1666]

60

September 2nd (Lord’s Day). Jane called us up about three in the morning,
to tell us of a great fire they saw in the city. So I rose and slipped on my
nightgown, and went to her window, and thought it to be on the backside
of Marke-Lane at the farthest; but being unused to such fire as followed,
I thought it far enough off, and so went to bed again and to sleep.
About seven rose again to dress myself, and then looked out of the
window, and saw the fire not so much as it was and further off. By and by
Jane comes and tells me that she hears that above 300 houses have
been burned down tonight by the fire we saw, and that it is now burning
down all Fish Street, by London Bridge.
So I made myself ready presently, and walked to the Tower, and there got
up upon one of the high places, Sir J. Robinson’s little son going up with
me; and there I did see the houses at that end of the bridge all on fire,
and an infinite great fire on this and the other side of the bridge.
[From The Diary of Samuel Pepys ]

WHAT YOU CAN DO
After they have completed the lesson, including the writing exercise, students can be
asked to make a diary jotting for the previous day. Perhaps you could also write a diary
entry describing what happened in school/class on the previous day, to share with the
class — try and make it amusing and interesting! Collect students’ pages (they may be
allowed to sign their names or make it anonymous, as they wish) and put them up on
the class notice board, together with your page, for everyone to read.

Amanda!
Every child feels that she/he is controlled and instructed not to do
one thing or another. You too may feel that your freedom is curtailed.
Write down some of the things you want to do, but your parents/
elders do not allow you to. To read the poem aloud, form pairs,
each reading alternate stanzas. You are in for a surprise!

Don’t bite your nails, Amanda!
Don’t hunch your shoulders, Amanda!
Stop that slouching and sit up straight,
Amanda!
(There is a languid, emerald sea,
where the sole inhabitant is me—
a mermaid, drifting blissfully.)
Did you finish your homework, Amanda?
Did you tidy your room, Amanda?
I thought I told you to clean your shoes,
Amanda!
(I am an orphan, roaming the street.
I pattern soft dust with my hushed, bare feet.
The silence is golden, the freedom is sweet.)
Don’t eat that chocolate, Amanda!
Remember your acne, Amanda!
Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you,
Amanda!

(I am Rapunzel, I have not a care;
life in a tower is tranquil and rare;
I’ll certainly never let down my bright hair!)
Stop that sulking at once, Amanda!
You’re always so moody, Amanda!
Anyone would think that I nagged at you,
Amanda!

ROBIN KLEIN

First Flight

languid: relaxed

62

drifting: moving slowly
pattern: make patterns
tranquil: calm

1. How old do you think Amanda is? How do you know this?
2. Who do you think is speaking to her?
3. Why are Stanzas 2, 4 and 6 given in parenthesis?
4. Who is the speaker in Stanzas 2, 4 and 6? Do you think this speaker is
listening to the speaker in Stanzas 1, 3, 5, and 7?
5. What could Amanda do if she were a mermaid?
6. Is Amanda an orphan? Why does she say so?
7. Do you know the story of Rapunzel? Why does she want to be Rapunzel?
8. What does the girl yearn for? What does this poem tell you about Amanda?
9. Read the last stanza. Do you think Amanda is sulking and is moody?

