The Making of a Scientist

6

Richard Ebright has recieved the Searle
Scholar Award and the Schering Plough
Award for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology. It was his fascination for butterflies
that opened the world of science to him.

READ AND FIND OUT
• How did a book become a turning point in Richard
Ebright’s life?
• How did his mother help him?
AT the age of twenty-two, a former ‘scout of the year’ excited the scientific
world with a new theory on how cells work. Richard H. Ebright and his
college room-mate explained the theory in an article in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science.
It was the first time this important scientific journal had ever
published the work of college students. In sports, that would be like
making the big leagues at the age of fifteen and hitting a home run
your first time at bat*. For Richard Ebright, it was the first in a long
string of achievements in science and other fields. And it all started
with butterflies.
An only child, Ebright grew up north of Reading, Pennsylvania.
“There wasn’t much I could do there,” he said. “I certainly couldn’t
play football or baseball with a team of one. But there was one thing I
could do — collect things.”
So he did, and did he ever! Beginning in kindergarten, Ebright
collected butterflies with the same determination that has marked all
his activities. He also collected rocks, fossils, and coins. He became
an eager astronomer, too, sometimes star-gazing all night.
* A home run in the game of baseball is when the batter scores a run after running safely
around all bases and back to the home plate without stopping. A ball hit out of the playing
field is also called a home run. Getting a paper published at the age of fifteen in a scientific
journal is here compared to scoring a home run while batting for the first time.

From the first he had a driving curiosity along with a bright mind.
He also had a mother who encouraged his interest in learning. She
took him on trips, bought him telescopes, microscopes, cameras,
mounting materials, and other equipment and helped him in many
other ways.
“I was his only companion until he started school,” his mother
said. “After that I would bring home friends for him. But at night we
just did things together. Richie was my whole life after his father died
when Richie was in third grade.”
She and her son spent almost every evening at the dining room
table. “If he didn’t have things to do, I found work for him — not
physical work, but learning things,” his mother said. “He liked it.
He wanted to learn.”
And learn he did. He earned top grades in school. “On everyday
things he was just like every other kid,” his mother said.
By the time he was in the second grade, Ebright had collected all twentyfive species of butterflies found around his hometown. (See following box.)
Species and Sub-species of Butterflies Collected in
Six Weeks in Reading, Pennsylvania
Gossamer-Winged
Butterflies
• white M hairstreak
• acadian hairstreak
• bronze copper
• bog copper
• purplish copper
• eastern-tailed blue
• melissa blue
• silvery blue
Snout Butterfly

Wood Nymphs
and Satyrs
• eyed brown
• wood nymph (grayling)

Brush-footed
Butterflies
• variegated fritillary
• Harris’s checkerspot
• pearl crescent
Monarchs
• monarch or milkweed • mourning cloak
• painted lady
Whites and Sulphurs
• buckeye
• olympia
• viceroy
• cloudless sulphur
• white admiral
• European cabbage
• red-spotted purple
• hackberry

“That probably would have been the end of my butterfly collecting,”
he said. “But then my mother got me a children’s book called The
Travels of Monarch X.” That book, which told how monarch butterflies
migrate to Central America, opened the world of science to the eager
young collector.

TheMakingofaScientist 33

At the end of the book, readers were invited to help study butterfly
migrations. They were asked to tag butterflies for research by Dr
Frederick A. Urquhart of the University of Toronto, Canada. Ebright’s
mother wrote to Dr Urquhart, and soon Ebright was attaching light
adhesive tags to the wings of monarchs. Anyone who found a tagged
butterfly was asked to send the tag to Dr Urquhart.
The butterfly collecting season around Reading lasts six weeks in
late summer. (See graph below.) If you’re going to chase them one by
one, you won’t catch very many. So the next step for Ebright was to
raise a flock of butterflies. He would catch a female monarch, take her
eggs, and raise them in his basement through their life cycle, from egg
to caterpillar to pupa to adult butterfly. Then he would tag the butterflies’
wings and let them go. For several years his basement was home to
thousands of monarchs in different stages of development.
Number and Kinds of Butterflies
Collected in Six Weeks
Gossamer-Winged
Kinds

Wood Nymphs and Satyrs
Brush-Footed
Whites and Sulphurs
Monarch
Snout
0

1

2

3

4 5 6 7 8
Number Collected

9 10

“Eventually I began to lose interest in tagging butterflies. It’s tedious
and there’s not much feedback,” Ebright said. “In all the time I did it,”
he laughed, “only two butterflies I had tagged were recaptured — and
they were not more than seventy-five miles from where I lived.”

READ AND FIND OUT
• What lesson does Ebright learn when he does not win
anything at a science fair?
• What experiments and projects does he then undertake?
• What are the qualities that go into the making of a scientist?

34 FootprintswithoutFeet

Then in the seventh grade he got a hint of what real science is
when he entered a county science fair — and lost. “It was really a sad
feeling to sit there and not get anything while everybody else had won
something,” Ebright said. His entry was slides of frog tissues, which
he showed under a microscope. He realised the winners had tried to
do real experiments, not simply make a neat display.
Already the competitive spirit that drives Richard Ebright was
appearing. “I knew that for the next year’s fair I would have to do a real
experiment,” he said. “The subject I knew most about was the insect
work I’d been doing in the past several years.”
So he wrote to Dr Urquhart for ideas, and back came a stack of
suggestions for experiments. Those kept Ebright busy all through
high school and led to prize projects in county and international
science fairs.
For his eighth grade project, Ebright tried to find the cause of a
viral disease that kills nearly all monarch caterpillars every few years.
Ebright thought the disease might be carried by a beetle. He tried
raising caterpillars in the presence of beetles. “I didn’t get any real
results,” he said. “But I went ahead and showed that I had tried the
experiment. This time I won.”
The next year his science fair project was testing the theory that
viceroy butterflies copy monarchs. The theory was that viceroys look
like monarchs because monarchs don’t taste good to birds. Viceroys,
on the other hand, do taste good
to birds. So the more they look like
monarchs, the less likely they are
to become a bird’s dinner.
Ebright’s project was to see
whether, in fact, birds would eat
monarchs. He found that a
starling would not eat ordinary
bird food. It would eat all the
monarchs it could get. (Ebright
said later research by other people
showed that viceroys probably do
copy the monarch.) This project
was placed first in the zoology
How is the monarch butterfly (top)
division and third overall in the
different from the viceroy butterfly (bottom)?
county science fair.

TheMakingofaScientist 35

In his second year in high school, Richard Ebright began the research
that led to his discovery of an unknown insect hormone. lndirectly, it
also led to his new theory on the life of cells.
The question he tried to answer was simple: What is the purpose of
the twelve tiny gold spots on a monarch pupa?
“Everyone assumed the spots were just ornamental,” Ebright said.
“But Dr Urquhart didn’t believe it.”
To find the answer, Ebright and another excellent science student
first had to build a device that showed that the spots were producing a
hormone necessary for the butterfly’s full development.
This project won Ebright first place in the county fair and entry
into the International Science and Engineering Fair. There he won
third place for zoology. He also got a chance to work during the
summer at the entomology laboratory of the Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research.
As a high school junior, Richard Ebright continued his advanced
experiments on the monarch pupa. That year his project won first
place at the International Science Fair and gave him another chance
to work in the army laboratory during the summer.
In his senior year, he went a step further. He grew cells from a
monarch’s wing in a culture and showed that the cells would divide
and develop into normal butterfly wing scales only if they were fed
the hormone from the gold spots. That project won first place for
zoology at the International Fair. He spent the summer after graduation
doing further work at the army laboratory and at the laboratory of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The following summer, after his freshman year at Harvard
University, Ebright went back to the laboratory of the Department of
Agriculture and did more work on the hormone from the gold spots.
Using the laboratory’s sophisticated instruments, he was able to
identify the hormone’s chemical structure.
A year-and-a-half later, during his junior year, Ebright got the idea
for his new theory about cell life. It came while he was looking at X-ray
photos of the chemical structure of a hormone.
When he saw those photos, Ebright didn’t shout, ‘Eureka!’ or even,
‘I’ve got it!’ But he believed that, along with his findings about insect
hormones, the photos gave him the answer to one of biology’s puzzles:
how the cell can ‘read’ the blueprint of its DNA. DNA is the substance
in the nucleus of a cell that controls heredity. It determines the form
and function of the cell. Thus DNA is the blueprint for life.

36 FootprintswithoutFeet

Ebright and his college room-mate, James R. Wong, worked all that
night drawing pictures and constructing plastic models of molecules
to show how it could happen. Together they later wrote the paper that
explained the theory.
Surprising no one who knew him, Richard Ebright graduated from
Harvard with highest honours, second in his class of 1,510. Ebright
went on to become a graduate student researcher at Harvard Medical
School. There he began doing experiments to test his theory.
If the theory proves correct, it will be a big step towards
understanding the processes of life. It might also lead to new ideas for
preventing some types of cancer and other diseases. All of this is possible
because of Ebright’s scientific curiosity. His high school research into
the purpose of the spots on a monarch pupa eventually led him to his
theory about cell life.
Richard Ebright has been interested in science since he first began
collecting butterflies — but not so deeply that he hasn’t time for other
interests. Ebright also became a champion debater and public speaker
and a good canoeist and all-around outdoors-person. He is also an
expert photographer, particularly of nature and scientific exhibits.
In high school Richard Ebright was a straight-A student. Because
learning was easy, he turned a lot of his energy towards the Debating
and Model United Nations clubs. He also found someone to admire —
Richard A. Weiherer, his social studies teacher and adviser to both
clubs. “Mr Weiherer was the perfect person for me then. He opened my
mind to new ideas,” Ebright said.
“Richard would always give that extra effort,” Mr Weiherer said.
“What pleased me was, here was this person who put in three or four
hours at night doing debate research besides doing all his research
with butterflies and his other interests.
“Richard was competitive,” Mr Weiherer continued, “but not in a
bad sense.” He explained, “Richard wasn’t interested in winning for
winning’s sake or winning to get a prize. Rather, he was winning
because he wanted to do the best job he could. For the right reasons,
he wants to be the best.”
And that is one of the ingredients in the making of a scientist.
Start with a first-rate mind, add curiosity, and mix in the will to win
for the right reasons. Ebright has these qualities. From the time the
book, The Travels of Monarch X, opened the world of science to him,
Richard Ebright has never lost his scientific curiosity.

ROBERT W. PETERSON

TheMakingofaScientist 37

GLOSSARY
leagues: groups of sports clubs or teams playing matches among
themselves
county: region
starling: common European bird (with black, brown-spotted plumage)
which nests near buildings and is a good mimic
entomology: the study of insects
eureka: a cry of triumph at a discovery (originally attributed to Archimedes)
canoeist: a person who paddles a canoe, a light boat

Think about it
1. How can one become a scientist, an economist, a historian... ? Does
it simply involve reading many books on the subject? Does it involve
observing, thinking and doing experiments?
2. You must have read about cells and DNA in your science books.
Discuss Richard Ebright’s work in the light of what you have studied.
If you get an opportunity to work like Richard Ebright on projects
and experiments, which field would you like to work on and why?

Talk about it
1. Children everywhere wonder about the world around them.
The questions they ask are the beginning of scientific inquiry.
Given below are some questions that children in India have asked
Professor Yash Pal and Dr Rahul Pal as reported in their book,
Discovered Questions (NCERT, 2006).
(i) What is DNA fingerprinting? What are its uses?
(ii) How do honeybees identify their own honeycombs?
(iii) Why does rain fall in drops?
Can you answer these questions? You will find Professor Yash Pal’s and
Dr Rahul Pal’s answers (as given in Discovered Questions) on page 75.
2. You also must have wondered about certain things around you.
Share these questions with your class, and try and answer them.

Suggested reading
• ‘Journey by Night’ by Norah Burke
• Children Who Made It Big by Thangamani
• School Days by Tom Brown

38 FootprintswithoutFeet

